1
99
1
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Aureoboletus citriniporus  (Halling) Klofac^  Ost. Z. Pilzk. 19: 141. 2010;  Boletus citriniporus  Halling 1977 
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a raw umber to dark brown cap that is dry to moist, and velvety to woolly, 2) whitish unchanging flesh, 3) unchanging lemon yellow pores and tubes, 4) a club-shaped to equal stem that is whitish with orange yellow at the top, the stem surface dry, sometimes with a slight reticulum at the top, 5) growth under oak, and 6) microscopic characters.^ |The description is derived from Halling(7). RANGE ^The holotype was found in CA (originally described in Halling(7)). He examined collections from Amador Co., Nevada Co., and Santa Cruz Co. in CA. It also occurs in the Pacific Northwest (the accompanying M. Beug photo from WA of a sequenced collection. N. Siegel, pers. comm., has collections from Corvallis OR.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^ammonia on cap cuticle dark vinaceous
CAP  4-7cm across, convex to flat-convex, "becoming irregular in outline"; raw umber to dark brown when young, unchanging or becoming blackish when old; dry, velutinous (velvety) to finely subtomentose, becoming moist and minutely rimose (cracked) when old
FLESH  in cap 0.5-1.0cm thick, solid, firm, whitish to pallid, unchanging when exposed; in stem firm, white, unchanging when exposed
PORES  small, 1-2 per mm, intense lemon yellow, unchanging; tubes 0.5-0.8cm long, "adnate when young, barely subdepressed with age", intense lemon yellow, unchanging when bruised
STEM  5-6cm x 1-1.5cm "subclavate to equal, pinched at the base"; "whitish to pallid, orange yellow at the apex"; dry, bald nearly overall, "but occasionally with a very slight reticulum at the apex"
ODOR  mild
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single to gregarious in soil under Quercus chrysolepis (Canyon Live Oak) and Q. agrifolia (California Live Oak)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores (10.5)12-13.5 x 3.75-4.5 um, "subfusiform and inequilateral in profile, often with a conspicuous suprahilar depression", elliptic to fusiform-elliptic in face view, very pale yellowish to colorless in KOH, pale ochraceous in Melzer's reagent^; basidia 2-spored or 4-spored, 22.5-37.5(45) x 9-10.5 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia 37.5-67.5 x 9-12.75 um, "clavate to ventricose rostrate to cylindrical", colorless in KOH, (brightly colored cystidia as indicated by Watling for the genus Aureoboletus were not found); cap cuticle "differentiated as a suberect tangled trichodermium when young, hyphae sometimes appearing subgelatinous with age, apical cells of hyphae not greatly differentiated, but occasionally tapering, rarely incrusted", colorless to ochraceous in KOH, reddish brown in Melzer's reagent, thin-walled, 3-4.5 um wide; stem cuticle "at apex composed of a hymenium of fertile clavate basidia and clavate to obpyriform hyphal tips, below the apex consisting of a turf of clavate to obpyriform hyphal cells, becoming repent and interwoven with age"; clamp connections absent
NAME ORIGIN  refers to the intense lemon yellow color of the pores
SIMILAR  Aureoboletus flaviporus is distinguished from B. citriniporus by the presence of a viscid to glutinous cap cuticle and stem, a different anatomy of the cap cuticle, a differently colored cap, and larger spores. The cap of B. citriniporus is "an umber brown that usually becomes blackish" and the stem is "whitish to pallid without any reddish to brown coloration". (Halling(7)). Previous authors have indicated that the stem and cap of Aureoboletus auriporus [described from New York] are cinnamon to light reddish brown, (Halling(7)).
SOURCES  Halling(7) (as Boletus citriniporus)
2
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Aureoboletus flaviporus  (Earle) Klofac^  Ost. Z. Pilzk. 19: 138. 2010;  Boletus flaviporus  Earle  Bull. N.Y. Bot. Gard. 3: 297. 1905
ENGLISH NAME(S)  viscid Boletus
NOTES  Features include viscid, cinnamon-colored to reddish brown cap, intensely yellow pores, pallid stem that is often punctate-roughened, especially when young, and an association with hardwoods.^ | The description is derived from Thiers except where noted. RANGE ^Aureoboletus flaviporus is found CA and OR (Bessette). It has been reported from British Columbia (C. Roberts pers. comm.) but there appear to be no vouchered or sequenced from BC, WA, or OR. The holotype is from NY.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^KOH applied on cap surface slowly orange, slowly pale greenish yellow with FeSO4, flesh pale lavender or negative with application of NH4OH and pale grayish olive with FeSO4, (Bessette), flesh pale gray with FeSO4 (Thiers)
CAP  7-15cm, convex becoming flat-convex to flat to somewhat depressed on disc and flared to highly irregular on margin; reddish brown, when old darkening to dark reddish brown to sometimes dark brown on the disc and fading to brown on the margin (elsewhere in the description cap referred to as cinnamon-colored); viscid to subviscid during all stages, "tomentose or apparently appressed-fibrillose, sometimes appearing glabrous", often reticulate [netted] to irregularly wrinkled, rarely fibrillose-scaly on margin when old^, (Thiers), pale cinnamon to dark reddish brown, sometimes darker brown on disc when old; viscid, subtomentose to bald, (Bessette)
FLESH  1-2cm thick, white to pale pink, unchanging when exposed or slowly becoming pinkish vinaceous^, (Thiers), white to pinkish buff (Bessette)
PORES  1mm or more broad, angular; intense yellow, unchanging or darkening slightly when bruised; tube layer 1-2cm thick, broadly and shallowly depressed, forming a distinct raised yellow network at top of stem, yellow and unchanging when exposed^, (Thiers), about 1mm wide, angular; brilliant yellow at first, becoming greenish yellow when old, (Bessette)
STEM  6-15cm x 1-3(4)cm, equal to club-shaped to narrowing toward the base, solid; yellow at top, becoming white to pallid to nearly colored as cap, base typically white; viscid in wet weather, dry to subviscid otherwise, bald to "punctate-roughened to occasionally fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly, sometimes ridges or obscurely reticulate", conspicuous white mycelium at base^, (Thiers), 7-15 x 1-3cm, nearly equal or widening or narrowing downward; yellowish near top, pale reddish brown on whitish ground color in lower part; viscid when fresh, soon dry, bald or sometimes with shallow longitudinal ribs, lacking reticulation or reticulate only at top, white basal mycelium, (Bessette)
ODOR  mild
TASTE  acid, somewhat unpleasant
EDIBILITY  edible (Bessette), edible but mediocre (Arora)
HABITAT  single to scattered to occasionally cespitose [in tufts] in soil in mixed or hardwood forests, especially with madrone^, (Thiers), under hardwoods, especially oak, madrone, manzanita, or in mixed woods, September to April, (Bessette), fall, winter, spring
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark olive brown^ (Thiers), olive brown (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-15 x 4-6 um, cylindric to obscurely fusoid [spindle-shaped], smooth, pale ochraceous in KOH, thin-walled^; basidia 4-spored, 23-29 x 8-12 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia scattered to numerous, 48-70 x 9-15 um, clavate to obscurely fusoid-ventricose, colorless, thin-walled, often appearing incrusted at apex; cap cuticle of interwoven gelatinous hyphae 3-4 um wide; stem cuticle a layer of interwoven gelatinous hyphae with scattered areas in which the terminal cells are differentiated as enlarged clavate cells, 40-50 x 15-20 um; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores 11-17 x 4-6 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with yellow pores'
SIMILAR  The viscid cap and punctate stem may cause confusion with Suillus species but Aureoboletus flaviporus is not associated with conifers, and has neither glandular dots nor a veil (Arora). Oregon State University has one collection from OR labeled Boletus auriporus Peck, a similar species found in the east, and west at least to Texas. Its pore surface usually stains dull brick red when bruised. See also the SIMILAR section of Boletus citriniporus.
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus), Arora(1)* (as Boletus), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
3
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Aureoboletus mirabilis  (Murrill) Halling^  in Halling, Fechner, Nuhn, Osmundson, Soytong, Arora, Binder & Hibbett,  Aust. Syst. Bot. 28: 19. 2015;  Boletus mirabilis  (Murrill) Murrill  Mycologia 4: 217. 1912;  Boletellus mirabilis (Murrill) Singer  Farlowia 2: 129. 1945;  Xerocomus mirabilis  (Murrill) Singer
ENGLISH NAME(S)  admirable bolete, bragger's bolete
NOTES  Features of this common bolete include 1) plush maroon brown cap, 2) stem of similar color, often with roughened longitudinal ridges reminiscent of bark, sometimes netted near the top, 3) yellow pores that do not stain blue, and 4) growth on or near rotting conifers.^ |A whitish then yellow stage of the pyrenomycete Hypomyces chrysospermum frequently grows on it. |The Aureoboletus name was proposed in Halling(6) in 2015 and supported in 2020 by the molecular study of Kuo(12).|"Aureoboletus mirabilis has a sister relationship to Aureoboletus, so one could either consider it an Aureoboletus or give it a different genus name. Since Aureoboletus species are viscid-capped boletes, and the suede-like velvety cap of this species could not be more different, A. mirabilis may be placed in its own genus", (D. Miller, pers. comm.). RANGE ^Aureoboletus mirabilis is common in WA and OR and also found in northern CA, (Thiers), ID (Drew Parker, pers. comm.), MT (Larry Evans, pers. comm.), and MI (Arora). It is also common in BC and there are collections at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  5-15(20)cm, convex to flat, margin often hung with fragments of tissue; dark reddish brown to maroon-brown, bay-brown, or chocolate-brown; moist to dry, granular to plush-like (with small often erect fibrillose scales)^, (Arora), 7-15cm, convex to bluntly convex becoming broadly convex to flat-convex, margin often with hanging remnants; dark reddish brown; "moist to lubricous when young, dry when older, somewhat appressed fibrillose-scaly to rough-tomentose when young, becoming conspicuously fibrillose-scaly and often squarrose-scaly with age", sometimes granular-scaly to somewhat areolate [cracked like dried mud] or cracked-scaly, (Thiers)
FLESH  thick; "white to dingy pinkish or yellow, rarely blueing when bruised"^, (Arora), 1-2cm thick, white to yellow, frequently with numerous areas staining flesh-colored when older, rarely changing to blue in irregular areas, in stem pale vinaceous, sometimes appearing yellow and typically becoming yellow when dry, (Thiers)
PORES  1-2 mm wide, pale yellow becoming mustard yellow and finally greenish yellow, sometimes staining darker yellow when bruised; tubes yellow^, (Arora), 1-2 mm wide, round to angular; yellow becoming olive yellow when old, unchanging or becoming deeper yellow when bruised; tube layer 1-2.5cm thick, depressed around stem, colored as pores, unchanging when bruised, (Thiers)
STEM  7-20cm x 1-3.5cm, usually club-shaped, firm; dark brown to maroon-brown or reddish brown, "sometimes with yellow, buff, or beige streaks"; "often roughened, pitted, or longitudinally ridged", the top often coarsely reticulate [netted], the base often with yellow mycelium^, (Arora), 8-15cm x 1-3cm, club-shaped, up to 5cm wide at base, solid; dark brown with occasional streaks of ivory or beige or brown; moist to dry, bald, but typically shaggy reticulate at top, "becoming smooth to uneven or ridged or shallowly pitted toward base, sometimes roughened and split with age", with yellow mycelium at base, (Thiers), partial veil and annulus absent (Bessette)
ODOR  acid or mild^ (Thiers), pleasant (Phillips)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Thiers), pleasant (Phillips)
EDIBILITY  choice (Thiers), delicious, some have a distinct lemony flavor, avoid specimens attacked by Hypomyces, (Arora)
HABITAT  single or in small groups "on or near rotting conifers, (especially hemlock), but sometimes appearing terrestrial"^, (Arora), single to scattered in soil in coastal forests, typically with hemlock logs and stumps, (Thiers), summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown^ (Arora, Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 18-24 x 7-9 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth^, (Arora), spores 18-22 x 7-9 um, subfusoid to subelliptic, smooth, dark brown in Melzer's, ochraceous in KOH, thick-walled; basidia 4-spored, 31-36 x 7-11 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia scattered to numerous, 60-90 x 10-18 um, fusoid-ventricose with obtuse to elongated apices, colorless, thin-walled; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'wonderful'
SIMILAR  Boletus fibrillosus has a fibrillose brown to dark brown cap, grows on the ground, and has smaller spores, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Arora(1)* (as Boletus), Thiers(1) (as Boletus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus), Trudell(4)* (as Boletus), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus), Lincoff(2)* (as Boletus), Miller(14)* (as Boletus), McKnight(1)* (as Boletus), Ammirati(1)* (as Boletus), Sept(1)* (as Boletus), AroraPocket(1)* (as Boletus), Desjardin(6)* (as Boletus), Halling(6), Siegel(2)* (as Aureoboletus mirabilis), Marrone(1)* (as 'Boletus' mirabilis), McBride(1)* (as Boletus mirabilis), Kuo(12), McAdoo(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
4
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus barrowsii  Thiers and A.H. Sm.^  Mycotaxon 3: 262-264. 1976
ENGLISH NAME(S)  white king bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) whitish to grayish buff smooth cap with suede-like texture, 2) thick unchanging whitish flesh, 3) pores that are whitish when young and do not become blue when bruised, 4) whitish to buff stem that is reticulate at least on the upper part, and 5) mild taste.^ | Trudell(4) comment, "Generally considered to occur only in the Southwest, there have been sporadic reports of it occurring in places such as Idaho and southern California, under trees other than ponderosa pine. In Seattle, a very similar mushroom is fairly common in late spring under oaks and species of Tilia [italicized], such as lindens and basswood. Although it was felt that this had to be a different species, preliminary DNA analysis suggests it is very close to B. barrowsii.". RANGE ^If both close taxa are included, B. barrowsii found at least in ID, CA, AZ, NM, CO, and Mexico, (Bessette). The University of Washington has collections from WA and NM. It was reported from BC (Redhead(5)), and there are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia and the Pacific Forestry Center.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains gray with application of FeSO4
CAP  6-30cm, obtuse to convex becoming broadly convex; margin incurved at first; white, whitish, or grayish buff; dry, smooth^, (Bessette), (6)9-20(30)cm, white to whitish or buff during all stages, unchanging or becoming brown when bruised; dry, dull, smooth, sometimes obscurely rimose [cracked], when young often covered with easily removable pruinose coating, or appearing bald, (Thiers), 6-25cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat; dull white to grayish or buff; dry, smooth or very slightly velvety, (Arora), whitish, creamy with a pinkish tinge, to buff; smooth or suede-like, (Phillips), whitish to pale tan; suede-like surface texture, (Trudell)
FLESH  white, unchanging when cut^, (Bessette), 2-3cm thick, white except sometimes pale vinaceous near cap surface, unchanging, (Thiers), thick; "white, not blueing when exposed (or blueing only very slightly near the tubes)", (Arora)
PORES  1-2 per mm, angular, "white when young, becoming yellowish and finally olive or brownish at maturity, not blueing when bruised"; tube layer 1-2cm thick^, (Bessette), 1-2mm, angular, white becoming yellowish when old, unchanging or darkening slightly when bruised; tube layer 1-2cm thick, colored as pores, (Thiers), white or pallid when young, becoming yellow to olive-yellow when old, not turning blue when bruised, (Arora)
STEM  8-15.5cm x 2-5cm, nearly equal or widening downward, sometimes bulbous at base, stem solid; whitish to pinkish buff or tinged brownish; dry, finely reticulate [netted], at least on upper part^, (Bessette), 8-15cm x 2-5cm, bulb up to 9cm wide, clavate or bulbous, sometimes base pointed; solid, whitish to pinkish buff or pinkish cinnamon, white at base, unchanging when bruised, reticulations typically fine and delicate, (Thiers), 6-20 x 2-6cm, equal or widening downwards, solid, firm; whitish to buff or cap-colored, sometimes with brownish stains; finely reticulate over at least upper part, (Arora)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), pleasant (Phillips), mild or sometimes strong and unpleasant when dried, (Thiers), strong odor when drying (Trudell)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), pleasant (Phillips)
EDIBILITY  yes, choice, (Bessette, Arora) 
HABITAT  scattered or in groups under ponderosa pine, fir, spruce, and live oak^, (Bessette), single or scattered to gregarious under hardwoods and conifers
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown^ (Bessette), dark olive brown (Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-15 x 4-5 um, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped] to subelliptic [somewhat elliptic], smooth, ochraceous^, (Bessette), spores 13-15 x 4-5 um, subfusoid to subelliptic, smooth, pale ochraceous in Melzer's reagent and in KOH, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 25-34 x 8-11 um, clavate; hymenial cystidia crowded on pores, scattered to numerous on sides of tubes, 37-50 x 5-9 um, "cylindric to subclavate to obscurely fusoid-ventricose"; cap cuticle poorly differentiated as a cutis of appressed to slightly interwoven hyphae; no clamp connections, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  in honor of its discoverer, Charles Barrows (1904-1989), a New Mexico amateur mycologist
SIMILAR  Boletus edulis can be similar when whitish, but B. edulis has a clearly differentiated, often viscid cap cuticle (skin), (Arora). Caloboletus marshii has a bitter taste, has pale yellow pores when young, and lacks reticulation on the stem, (Arora). C. marshii has a bitter taste and bluing flesh, and lacks the reticulate stem (Frank). See also SIMILAR section of Boletus subalpinus.
SOURCES  Thiers(8), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Trudell(4), Redhead(5), AroraPocket(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Frank(5) (discussing Caloboletus marshii), Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*
5
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus edulis  Bull.^  Syst. Mycol. I: 392. 1821
ENGLISH NAME(S)  king bolete, cep, steinpilz, porcini, penny bun
NOTES  Features include 1) light brown to warm brown, yellowish brown or reddish brown cap, 2) small white pores that become yellowish or olive yellow or brownish but do not turn blue, 3) massive stem with whitish reticulation (network), and 4) mild taste. It is a popular edible mushroom.^ | Arora(2) described the often massive Boletus edulis var. grandedulis from CA, differing "in its brown to slightly reddish pore surface when mature". Var. edulis prefers Sitka spruce, whereas var. grandedulis occurs in a variety of coniferous forests, especially under pines, and occasionally live oak or madrone, (Siegel(2)). RANGE ^Boletus edulis is widely distributed in North America, including at least BC (collections at the University of British Columbia), WA and CA (collections at the University of Washington), and OR (collections at Oregon State University). It has been reported from MT (Larry Evans, pers. comm.), and ID (K. Chadwick, pers. comm.). It occurs in Europe, Asia, North Africa, and Australia, (Breitenbach). Daniel Winkler has reported var. grandedulis from WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap stains orange with application of KOH, and slowly pale grayish green with FeSO4, flesh negative with KOH and pale grayish green with application of FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  4.5-38cm, convex to nearly flat; "brown to reddish brown, pale cinnamon brown, rusty red, or yellowish tan"; dry, viscid when moist, smooth to slightly wrinkled^, (Bessette), 9-18cm, convex to obtusely convex becoming broadly convex to flat-convex, typically massive and heavy, margin incurved becoming downcurved; pale brown to buff, when old darkening to brown to reddish brown, often paler toward margin; moist to lubricous [slippery], usually becoming viscid to subviscid when wet or old, uneven or often irregularly pitted or wrinkled when old, (Thiers who includes B. pinophilus / B. rex-veris) 
FLESH  white, not turning blue when bruised^, (Bessette), 2-4cm thick, firm, white, unchanging or darkening slightly when exposed, in stem white, unchanging except occasional brown stain at base, (Thiers who includes B. pinophilus / B. rex-veris)
PORES  2-3 per mm, round; "white when young, becoming yellow to olive-yellow, then brownish yellow to brown in age, staining yellowish olive to dull orange-cinnamon or pale yellowish brown when bruised", tube layer 1-3cm thick^, (Bessette), 2-3 per mm, angular, white becoming yellow when old, unchanging or staining brown when bruised, tube layer 1-3cm thick, adnexed becoming depressed when old, unchanging when exposed, (Thiers who includes B. pinophilus / B. rex-veris), pores in the Boletus edulis group are ' "stuffed" with a white material which disappears as the pores expand and the yellow pore surface is exposed', (R. Bishop, pers. comm.)
STEM  5-31cm x 2-7.5cm, widening downward or nearly equal, sometimes bulbous, stem solid; white or pale brown with distinct whitish reticulum [network] on upper one-third or more^, (Bessette), 8-16cm x 1.5-2.5cm, massive, usually club-shaped, up to 6cm thick at bulbous base, solid; white to occasionally pale brown; dry to moist, bald but reticulate [netted] at least at top, (Thiers who includes B. pinophilus / B. rex-veris), reticulum first white then slightly darker than background (Lincoff(1))
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), pleasant (Phillips)
TASTE  not distinctive (Bessette), mild or nutty (Arora(1) who includes B. pinophilus / B. rex-veris), pleasant (Phillips), sweetish, like hazelnuts, (Lincoff(1))
EDIBILITY  choice (Arora(1))
HABITAT  single, scattered or in groups on the ground under conifers^, (Bessette), generally associated with pines in California, but there are some varieties that are associated with hardwoods, (Thiers who includes B. pinophilus / B. rex-veris), favors conifers (pine, spruce, hemlock, fir) but also grows with hardwoods such as oak and birch, (Arora(1) who includes B. pinophilus / B. rex-veris), under conifers (pine, hemlock), and hardwoods (birch, aspen), (Lincoff(2)), under conifers, summer, "if there has been enough rain, and throughout the fall season; in spring in the Cascade Mountains, at elevations above 1000 feet", (Ammirati), spring, summer, and fall, (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown^ (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-19 x 4-6.5 um, "elliptic, smooth, pale yellowish brown"^, (Bessette), spores 13-18 x 4-7 um, fusiform [spindle-shaped] to somewhat elliptic, smooth, dark ochraceous in Melzer's, colorless to pale ochraceous in KOH, walls slightly thickened; basidia 4-spored, 30-40 x 10-12 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia often inconspicuous, often deeply embedded, 48-67 x 5-10 um, "fusoid-ventricose, often narrowed and with tapered, elongated apices", colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle a tangled trichodermium that collapses when old, occasional free hyphal tips; stem cuticle differentiated as a layer of fertile basidia with scattered to numerous fusoid-ventricose caulocystidia; clamp connections absent, (Thiers who includes B. pinophilus / B. rex-veris), spores (13)14-17(19) x 4-6.5 um, subfusiform, smooth, as revived in Melzer's reagent "ochraceous shaded greenish gray but gradually becoming ochraceous to weakly dextrinoid", in KOH pale tawny, wall only slightly thickened; basidia 4-spored, 32-40 x 10-12 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia "scattered, 42-48(65) X 7-10 um, narrowly fusoid-ventricose", colorless in KOH, pale yellowish in Melzer's reagent, smooth, thin-walled; cap cuticle a trichodermium of intertangled (and finally collapsing) hyphae 4-10 um wide, colorless and gelatinous in KOH, lacking incrusting pigments; clamp connections absent, (Smith for var. edulis)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'edible'
SIMILAR  Boletus pinophilus [the concept probably falling now under Boletus rex-veris] has a stem that is pale brown to brown in its lower part, darkening when handled or bruised, and the reticulation is whitish near top but brownish in lower part and darkening when handled, (Bessette). Boletus rex-veris [as B. pinophilus] has a dark red to red-brown cap whereas B. edulis is often lighter (Arora(1)). Boletus fibrillosus has a dry, much darker fibrillose cap, yellow tubes when young, and a much darker stem, (Thiers). Boletus regineus has a very dark brown to blackish cap that is moist to dry but not viscid, shorter spores, and a different cap cuticle, (Thiers). Boletus mottiae has a dark brown cap with a wrinkled-netted surface. Boletus barrowsii is told from very pale forms of B. edulis by the lack of a clearly differentiated cap cuticle in B. barrowsii. See also SIMILAR section of Boletus 'pinophilus' and Boletus subalpinus.
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Smith(35), Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Ammirati(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Breitenbach(3)*, Sept(1)*, AroraPocket(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Arora(2)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*, McBride(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
6
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus edulis  var. grandedulis  D. Arora & Simonini^  Econ. Bot. 62(3): 374. 2008
ENGLISH NAME(S)  California king bolete
NOTES  Var. grandedulis is similar to typical (European) Boletus edulis but larger and with a brown to cinnamon pore surface when mature, (Arora(2)).^ | This variety is abundant "in the fall and winter (and occasionally spring) from San Luis Obispo County in central California north along the coast to Mendocino County and beyond, and fruiting during the summer and fall in the Sierra Nevada and other mountain ranges", (Arora(2)). The description is derived from Arora(2) except where noted. RANGE ^Boletus edulis var. grandedulis was described from CA and has been reported from the Pacific Northwest (e.g. Siegel(2) - see HABITAT.). Daniel Winkler has reported var. grandedulis from WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  10-50cm across or more, "convex or bun-shaped in most stages"; "whitish soon becoming pale brown or brown or often deep reddish-brown as it matures, or yellow-brown in dry weather (often yellowest at margin)"; "viscid when moist", "smooth or wrinkled"
FLESH  in both cap and stem "thick, firm, white, not staining when cut (or rarely blueing slightly just above the tube layer)"
PORES  pore surface "whitish when young, becoming tan or slightly yellower as it matures and then becoming distinctly brown to cinnamon or even reddish at maturity", not blueing when bruised "but may stain slightly brownish"; "tube layer olive-yellow or olive when mature"
STEM  up to 40cm or more long and up to 15cm wide, "often massive", "often bulbous when young", clavate (club-shaped) to more or less equal when old; "typically white at first, remaining white or becoming pale brown to brown" when old; upper part "covered with a fine white reticulum when young, the reticulum sometimes obscure in age and at other times conspicuous and extending nearly to the base"
ODOR  mild or pleasant
TASTE  mild or pleasant
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  in California, single to gregarious in coastal pine forests and at their edges, less commonly associated with live oaks, "and found at mid-to-high elevations in the Sierra Nevada" with pine and true fir, (Arora(2)), Siegel(2) say in the California context that it occurs in various coniferous forests, especially under Monterey Pine and Bishop Pine, also Shore Pine on the Far North Coast, into the Pacific Northwest. They also mention that it occasionally associates with live oak and madrone, more rarely with Valley Oak. (Siegel(2))
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores (12)13-15.5(17) x (3.8)4-5.5(6) um, "fusiform to subellipsoid" (spindle-shaped to somewhat elliptic), smooth^; basidia 2-spored, 3-spored, or 4-spored, clavate; hymenial cystidia "inconspicuous, fusoid-ventricose"; cap cuticle "an often gelatinized trichodermium of interwoven hyphae with irregular, often diverticulate end cells" measuring 34-52 x 6-10 um
NAME ORIGIN  "grand" means "large" and "edulis" refers to Boletus edulis
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Arora(2)*, Siegel(2)*
7
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus fibrillosus  Thiers^  California Mushrooms pp.45-46. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  fib king
NOTES  Features include a dark brown to chestnut brown, dry, fibrillose cap, unchanging flesh, yellow pores, a brown reticulate stem, and a red to pink KOH reaction on the cap cuticle.^ |According to D. Miller, pers. comm. May 10, 2021, reports of Boletus pinophilus could be Boletus fibrillosus. |The description is derived from Thiers except where indicated. RANGE ^Boletus fibrillosus is "recorded from the Pacific Coast of California and the Cascades, distribution limits yet to be established" (Bessette). The type is from CA. There are collections from WA and OR at the University of Washington. Paul Kroeger says Boletus fibrillosus appeared in quantity in BC about 2004, and a collection from 2005 in BC is at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  cap cuticle red to pink with application of KOH
CAP  6-17cm, convex becoming flat-convex to broadly convex to flat with flared margin, margin incurved at first; brown to dark brown, occasionally with paler buff spots; dry, even or somewhat wrinkled, typically tomentose to velvety, becoming fibrillose, sometimes fibrillose-scaly on disc^, (Thiers), "brown, cinnamon-brown to chestnut-brown, or dark brown, sometimes with buff-colored spots", (Bessette), "some shade of dark brown, often with lighter areas"; "typically wrinkled and velvety to distinctly fibrillose", (Trudell)
FLESH  1.5-3cm thick, soft, floccose [cottony]; white to pale buff, unchanging when exposed, in stem white, unchanging when exposed
PORES  1-2 per mm, angular; light yellow when young, dark yellow when old, unchanging; tube layer 1.5-2.5cm thick, "narrowly and shallowly depressed" around stem, colored as pores, unchanging or darkening slightly when bruised^, (Thiers), light yellow or somewhat darker, tubes similar in color, (Trudell), pale yellow to yellow or dingy olive-yellow (occasionally pallid when very young), (Arora)
STEM  10-16cm x 2-3cm, equal to club-shaped, rarely narrowing downward, often pinched at base, solid; pale yellow at top, otherwise light brown to brown; dry to moist, reticulate [netted] over most parts, white basal mycelium^, (Thiers), long relative to cap, often pinched off at base; pale at top, dark brown in lower part; strongly reticulate, covered by mycelium at base, (Trudell), 8-16cm x 2-4cm, usually lined or fibrillose, reticulate at least at top, (Arora)
ODOR  mild
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  unknown (Thiers), edible but inferior to B. edulis (Trudell)
HABITAT  single to scattered in soil in dense mixed coastal forests^, (Thiers), in dense mixed coastal forests or in conifer woods (Bessette), in old growth forests of Abies (fir) and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), earlier succession forests of T. heterophylla and Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and other mixed forest stands, (Trudell)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark olive-brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-17.5 x 3.5-5.5 um, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped] to ventricose [wider in middle], smooth, pale ochraceous in Melzer's, pale yellow to colorless in KOH, moderately thick-walled^; basidia 4-spored, 35-40 x 8-12 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia scattered, inconspicuous, 38-46 x 6-8 um, subcylindric to fusoid-ventricose with elongated apices, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle differentiated as a trichodermium of hyphae have +/- equal cells; stem cuticle differentiated as a layer of fertile basidia and caulocystidia, which are colorless, subcylindric to clavate, abundant on edges of reticulum
NAME ORIGIN  means 'fibrillose'
SIMILAR  Boletus edulis has a smooth to wrinkled or pitted (not fibrillose) cap that is lighter in color and slippery to viscid when wet, white tubes when young, and a stem that is lighter in color, (Thiers). See also SIMILAR section of 'Boletus' mirabilis and Boletus mottiae.
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Bessette(3)*, Trudell(4)*, Arora(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*, McAdoo(1)*
8
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus mottiae  Thiers^  California Mushrooms p.36. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  It is possible that at least the holotype of the species is a variation of Boletus regineus. The outstanding character is the strongly reticulated or ridged cap surface, other features include a moist to subviscid brown cap, white unchanging flesh, angular white pores that become yellow to greenish yellow but do not change when bruised, buff to pinkish buff stem that is finely reticulate over entire surface, and microscopic characters.^ |According to D. Miller (pers. comm. December 5, 2021) this may be Boletus regineus and not a separate species, since an unpublished sequence of the holotype of B. mottiae matches Boletus regineus - the name B. regineus could still take priority if B. mottiae is considered an aberrant form. |Boletus mottiae was described by Thiers as Boletus mottii, but since the person after whom it was named was a woman, "mottiae" is correct. RANGE ^The species was described from CA. It has been reported from WA (J. Lindgren, pers. comm., M. Beug, pers. comm.) and there is a collection by J. Ammirati at the University of Washington. There is a collection from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre. It has also been reported from OR (H. Thiers 1986 pers. comm. to L. Norvell), and appears on an Idaho foray list.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface and flesh do not stain with the application of KOH or FeSO4
CAP  6-12cm, convex, expanding, sometimes as far as shallowly depressed; brown ("cinnamon" to "cinnamon brown" Ridgway colors) on the disc, fading to buff toward the margin; moist to subviscid, "conspicuously wrinkled-reticulate over entire surface during all stages of development, the reticulum noticeable raised on the disc, but sometimes becoming shallower and may eventually appear as appressed fibrillose scales on the very margin", the reticulations remain very pronounced on dried caps and are usually darker than intervening areas^, (Thiers), pitted and/or ridged cap (Arora)
FLESH  1-2cm thick, soft; white, unchanging when exposed, the same in the stem^ (Thiers)
PORES  up to 1mm broad, angular, white when young, becoming yellow to greenish yellow when mature, unchanging when bruised; tube layer 0.5-1cm thick, depressed, colored as pores and unchanging when bruised^, (Thiers)
STEM  5-7.5cm x 1.5-3cm at top, equal to subclavate [somewhat club-shaped], solid; buff to pinkish buff during all stages of development; "dry, finely reticulate over entire surface", reticulations colored as surface, "reticulations suggestive of those of B. edulis but more delicate"^, (Thiers) 
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Thiers)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Thiers)
HABITAT  type was found under conifers^ (Thiers), fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  unknown
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14.3-17.1 x 3.8-5.2 um, cylindric to subelliptic [somewhat elliptic] in face view, ventricose and inequilateral in side view, smooth^, pale ochraceous in KOH, slightly darker in Melzer's reagent, thin-walled; basidia 2-spored and 4-spored, 23-30 x 7-10 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia not seen when specimen revived in KOH; cap cuticle "subgelatinous, up to 500 um broad, well differentiated as a somewhat tangled to suberect trichodermium, hyaline in KOH, not staining in Melzer's, terminal hyphae septate with terminal cells ovoid to clavate, 20-40 x 10-20 um, subterminal cells more elongate to ellipsoid, walls sometimes incrusted, cross walls inamyloid, hyphae 3-7 um wide"; stem cuticle "a layer of fertile basidia with scattered, fusoid to clavate to fusoid-ventricose caulocystidia"; clamp connections not seen, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  after Lillian Mott
SIMILAR  Boletus mottiae is distinguished from members of Boletus edulis complex by the strongly reticulated or ridged surface of the cap of B. mottiae. When compared with B. edulis, cap color is different, and reticulum on stem is of B. mottiae is much more delicate, (Thiers). Boletus fibrillosus (cap surface remotely suggestive of that of B. mottiae) has yellow tubes when young, a rather elongated stem, and a much darker colored cap, (Thiers).
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus mottii), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)
9
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus regineus  D. Arora and Simonini^  Economic Botany 62: 358. 2008
ENGLISH NAME(S)  queen bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a nearly black cap with a whitish bloom and a smooth or somewhat pitted surface, 2) white to vinaceous-tinged, unchanging flesh, 3) small angular pores that are white becoming yellowish and do not turn blue, 4) club-shaped to equal, reticulate stem that is white and may become vinaceous brown, 5) growth under hardwoods or conifers, and 6) microscopic characters.^ | Boletus regineus was known for many years on the west coast of North America as Boletus aereus Bull. The taxon of CA, OR, and WA was redescribed in 2008 as Boletus regineus D. Arora and Simonini. The authors noted that the gelatinized pileipellis clearly distinguished it from European B. aereus, which has a dry, velvety cap cuticle with a non-gelatinized trichoderm of subparallel hyphae, and a browner stem, (Arora(2)). Boletus mottiae Thiers, California Mushrooms p.36. 1975 is said to be a "mutated" collection of Boletus regineus. RANGE ^Collections of Boletus regineus were examined from CA where it is fairly common, but distribution in OR and WA is also mentioned (Arora(2)). It has been reported as Boletus aereus from OR (H. Thiers 1986, pers. comm. to L. Norvell, Dick Bishop pers. comm.), WA (J. Lindgren pers. comm., M. Beug pers. comm., collection at the University of Washington as B. aereus), and BC (O. Ceska pers. comm.). A collection from OR was used in Arora(3).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh does not stain with application of KOH or FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  7-30cm across, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; "very dark brown when fresh but often entirely or partially overlaid with a fine white bloom that gives it a paler, frosted appearance, in age the hoary patches tending to disappear and the surface often becoming paler brown or cinnamon blotched with even paler (white to pale tan) areas"; bald except for the hoary patches, moist but typically viscid when old or in wet weather, "sometimes uneven or with broad depressions"^, (Arora(2)), 5-15(20)cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat; "dark brown to nearly black when young and covered at least partially with a fine whitish bloom", but when old becoming smooth and cinnamon or red-brown or blotched with paler, whitish to tan areas; dry or moist (or viscid only when old), smooth or somewhat pitted, (Arora(1)), 10-15cm, convex to nearly spherical when young, becoming broadly convex to flat-convex to flat when old; dark brown to almost black, when old sometimes fading irregularly on disc to buff or reddish brown with irregular areas almost white to tan; moist, never viscid, often pitted or with broad depressions, especially toward margin, bald but with scattered white pruinose areas or patches, (Thiers)
FLESH  thick and white in cap and stem, "but sometimes vinaceous-tinged when young", "not staining appreciably when cut or sometimes exhibiting a very slight blueing just above the tube layer"^, (Arora(2)), thick; white or tinged reddish, not turning blue when exposed, or turning blue only slightly near tubes, (Arora(1)), 2-4cm thick, vinaceous when young, white when old except pale yellow above tubes and pale vinaceous below cap surface; in stem white and unchanging when exposed, (Thiers)
PORES  pores and tubes white when young becoming yellow then greenish yellow as fruiting body matures, not turning blue when bruised^, (Arora(2)), at first stuffed with pith; white when young, becoming yellow to greenish yellow when old, not turning blue when exposed, (Arora(1)), up to 1mm, angular; white when young, becoming yellow when mature, not changing where bruised; tube layer 1.5-2cm thick, adnate to adnexed, becoming depressed, white when young, becoming yellow when mature, (Thiers), 1-3 per mm, angular; white becoming dingy yellow; tube layer 1-2cm thick, becoming depressed near stem when old, (Bessette)
STEM  7-20cm x 2.5-8cm, equal to clavate [club-shaped] or slightly bulbous (especially when young); white or nearly so, sometimes brownish when old but more often remaining white; bald except for reticulation over at least the upper part, the reticulation white at first, white to brown when old^, (Arora(2)), 5-15cm x 2-5cm at top, usually widening downward when young but often equal when old, firm, solid; white or often brown when old; "finely reticulate at least over upper part", (Arora(1)), 8-11.5cm x 2.5-4cm at top, clavate [club-shaped] to subbulbous [somewhat bulbous] when young, unchanging or becoming more or less equal when old, solid; when young pallid to almost white, unchanging or becoming vinaceous or vinaceous brown when old; "dry, reticulate at least over upper half, sometimes strongly and conspicuously so", (Thiers)
ODOR  mild^ (Arora(2)), mild (Thiers)
TASTE  mild^ (Arora(2)), mild or pleasant (Arora(1)), mild (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  delicious (Arora(1), Arora(2), Thiers)
HABITAT  single or in groups, in California north to Oregon commonly associated with hardwoods (tanoak especially, madrone, golden chinquapin, manzanita, and oak), usually in fall (October to December) but occasionally in spring, less commonly in the Cascades of Oregon and Washington associated with conifers^, (Arora(2)), single, scattered, or gregarious in mixed woods and under hardwoods (especially oaks), (Arora(1)), scattered to gregarious under oaks and madrones (Thiers for California)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "olive-brown in mass, but yellower than closely related species under the microscope", (Arora(2))^, dark olive-brown (Arora(1), Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (11.5)12-15(17) x (3.9)4-4.7(5.4) um, "variable in shape and dimensions, long ellipsoid-fusiform"^; basidia clavate, colorless, mostly 4-spored, 23-40 x 8-11.5 um; hymenial cystidia thin-walled, inconspicuous; cap cuticle "a completely gelatinized cutis when mature (and sometimes even in youth)", typically 200-250 um thick, cuticular cells 7-10 um wide, "variable in shape, sometimes branched or with diverticula", (Arora(2)), spores 12-14 x 4-5 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth, (Arora(1)), spores 12-13.5 x 4-5 um, subelliptic to subfusoid, smooth, pale ochraceous in KOH and Melzer's, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 23-30 x 8-10 um, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia inconspicuous, embedded in hymenium, 28-34 x 7-11 um, colorless in KOH and Melzer's, thin-walled; cap cuticle "a broad (175 um) trichodermium of erect, septate hyphal tips, terminal cells not enlarged, not incrusted, hyaline in KOH, pale ochraceous in Melzer's, hyphae 4-5 um wide"; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  Latin 'regina' means 'queen'
SIMILAR  Boletus edulis has a lighter brown cap that may become viscid, longer spores and a different cap cuticle, (Thiers). B. edulis has paler cap often with reddish tones, and grows under conifers, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus aereus), Arora(1)* (as Boletus aereus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus aereus), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus aereus), Lincoff(1)* (as Boletus aereus), Both(1), Arora(2), AroraPocket(1)* (as Boletus aereus), Arora(3), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*
10
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus rex-veris  D. Arora & Simonini^  Economic Botany 62(3): 373. 2008;  Boletus pinophilus (misapplied name);  Boletus pinicola (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  spring king bolete, spring king
NOTES  Features include a dry reddish brown cap, when young with a fine white bloom, white unstaining flesh, pores that are whitish at first becoming yellow or yellowish buff and finally greenish, the pores sometimes becoming cinnamon brown near cap margin, dry white-reticulate club-shaped stem that is white when young, often developing brownish tinges when old, and spring growth in the mountains.^ |This species has been referred to as Boletus pinophilus Pilat & Dermek and as its synonym Boletus pinicola (Vittad.) A. Venturi, but that European species is considered by some authors to be somewhat different. Bessette(3) describes as "widely distributed throughout North America" a taxon under the name Boletus pinophilus Pilat & Dermek (with spores given as 15-20 x 4-6 um). Arora(2) say that the spores of B. rex-veris are slightly narrower than those of the European Boletus pinophilus, but Snell(6) found that spores of dried collections of Boletus edulis subsp. pinicola sent to them from California, Montana, Wyoming and Colorado were somewhat wider and longer (otherwise fitting the European descriptions). Whereas the European descriptions gave the spores as 14-17 x 4.5-5.5 um, 13-17.5 x 4.5-6 um etc., they found the spores of the specimens on the whole slightly larger: 14-21 x 5-6 um, with a few 7 um wide, mostly 16-18 x 5.5-6 um, with a tendency for the majority to vary in length directly with the size of the specimens. (Snell(6)). Nevertheless, sequencing of a Washington "spring king" indicated that it was Boletus rex-veris (M. Beug, pers. comm.). |According to D. Miller, pers. comm. May 10, 2021, reports of Boletus pinophilus could be Boletus fibrillosus. |The description is derived from Arora(2). RANGE ^Collections were examined from CA and OR by Arora(2). In CA it is locally abundant in the mountains, fruiting in April-June at mid-elevations (3000-4000 feet) and into July at higher elevations (up to 7000 feet), occurring at somewhat lower elevations in Cascades of OR and WA, extending east through the Blue Mountains to ID and perhaps beyond, and north to BC, outside of California also fruiting principally in spring or early summer, (Arora(2)). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  10-30cm across or occasionally larger, broadly convex or bun-shaped, becoming nearly flat or uneven; usually reddish brown but varying to tan or paler where hidden by soil or humus and often developing ocher tones when old or where exposed to the sun, and at other times dark dull brown; typically not viscid except when wet or when old, bald "except for a very fine white bloom that covers often irregular areas of the young cap"
FLESH  firm; white in both cap and stem (or reddish-tinged just above tube layer), unchanging when cut
PORES  pores and tube layer "white when young, gradually becoming yellow or yellowish-buff and finally olive-yellow or greenish", pores near the cap margin may become cinnamon brown, but pore surface not becoming uniformly brown or cinnamon
STEM  5-20cm or more long, 2.5-10cm wide, typically club-shaped with a pointed and often a curved base when young, becoming more or less equal when old "but usually retaining a tapered or pointed base"; white when young, often developing tan or more often reddish brown tinges when old, especially in the upper part but occasionally throughout; typically reticulate over upper part, reticulum fine and white when young (sometimes barely discernable), often brown when old "as the meshes become wider and coarser" 
ODOR  mild
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  yes (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious or clustered under mountain conifers, especially Pinus ponderosa (Ponderosa Pine), Pinus contorta (Lodgepole Pine), and Abies spp., often buried in needle duff beneath understory shrubs
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores (14)15-17(19) x (4)4.5-5(5.2) um, elliptic-subfusiform with prominent suprahilar depression, yellowish^; basidia 4-spored, (40)45-60(65) x 9-11.5 um, clavate; pleurocystidia (45)50-65 x 6.5-7.5 um, cylindric-fusiform, colorless, cheilocystidia (30)45-70 x 11-17 um, "clavate, sometimes narrowing or with capitulum or wide-fusiform"; cap cuticle an interwoven trichoderm, often weakly gelatinized when old but typically not gelatinized when young, made up of chains of cells with cylindric end cells having sharpened or rounded tips, (20)30-80(128) x (6.5)8-14(20) um
NAME ORIGIN  "rex" Latin for "king", "veris" Latin for "of spring" (Arora)
SIMILAR  Boletus pinophilus of Europe has a more highly gelatinized cap cuticle, a browner stem, and slightly broader spores, (Arora(2) but see also comments in NOTES). Spores of Boletus pinicola Vitt. of Europe (with synonym B. pinophilus Pilat and Dermek) are 14-17 x 4.5-5.5 um, (Moser(1)). See also SIMILAR section of Boletus edulis and Boletus 'pinophilus'.
SOURCES  Arora(2), Bessette(3) discussing B. pinophilus, Moser(1) (discussing B. pinicola Vitt. and B. pinophilus Pilat & Dermek), Snell(6) (re Boletus edulis subsp. pinicola), Desjardin(6)*, Marrone(1)*, McAdoo(1)*
11
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  'Boletus' smithii  Thiers^  Mycologia 57: 530-532. 1965
ENGLISH NAME(S)  Smith's Boletus
NOTES  It is likely that this species will require combination into a new genus. Features include 1) velvety, tomentose, or fibrillose cap that is olive buff to olive yellow with pinkish or reddish overtones and decidedly red when old, 2) flesh that is pale yellow and turns blue erratically when cut, 3) yellow pores that become olive yellow when old, and turn blue, and 4) stem that is yellow or red or usually a combination, and often pruinose but not reticulate.^ |'Boletus' smithii will probably be moved to a different genus.. RANGE ^Boletus smithii is found in WA, OR, ID, and CA, (Thiers), and also in BC, (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle black with KOH, (Thiers), cap cuticle dark reddish brown to blackish with application of KOH, flesh blue-gray with application of FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  5-16cm, convex to flat-convex; background olive yellow to buff, but typically with pinkish or reddish overtones or blotches, when older frequently red over entire surface or with olive pigment confined to narrow marginal zone, sometimes becoming yellowish near margin; dry, dull, often with irregular depressions when older, velvety to tomentose when young, becoming fibrillose to matted fibrillose when old, sometimes appearing bald when very old and often becoming rimose-areolate [cracked like dried mud] with drying or when old^, (Thiers), "tawny-olive to olive-yellow or pale olive-brown when young, developing reddish tones and sometimes pinkish red to read nearly overall in age", (Bessette), olive to olive-yellow, flushed in part or entirely rose red, especially when old, (Phillips), olive buff with pinkish or reddish overtones, more decidedly red when old, (Both), often has gray-brown, buff, and tan colors, especially at first, becoming infused with pinkish to reddish overtones, some caps very reddish when old, (Trudell)
FLESH  1-3cm thick, pale yellow except sometimes reddish near cap surface, "unchanging or slowly and erratically changing to blue when exposed, occasionally rapidly bluing", in stem yellow to pallid, turning blue when exposed^, (Thiers), firm, pale yellow, slightly blue when bruised, (Phillips)
PORES  1-2 per mm, angular; yellow becoming dark yellow, sometimes reddish near margin when old; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, adnate to arcuate-decurrent when young, typically deeply narrowly depressed when old, yellow becoming dark yellow, turning blue immediately on exposure^, (Thiers), yellow at first, becoming olive-yellow when old, turning blue when bruised, (Bessette)
STEM  6-16cm x 1-3.5cm at top, equal or widening downward or sometimes club-shaped, solid; red toward top, changing to yellow toward the base, "sometimes the color pattern reversed or entirely red or, rarely, entirely yellow, usually with a distinct red band at the apex with age"; "dry, smooth to granulose or pruinose, occasionally appearing appressed-fibrillose to tomentose, not reticulate"^, (Thiers)
ODOR  mild^ (Thiers)
TASTE  mild^ (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette, Phillips)
HABITAT  single to gregarious on soil in dense mixed coastal forests, fall and winter^, (Thiers), single, scattered, or in groups on ground in conifer or mixed woods, July to December, (Bessette), summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown^ (Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14.5-19.2 x 4-6 um, fusoid to subcylindric in face view, ventricose in side view, smooth, inamyloid, pale ochraceous in KOH, thin-walled^; basidia 4-spored, 30-36 x 7-10 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia typically deeply embedded in hymenium (and sometimes obscure), 30-60 x 7-12 um, clavate to fusoid to fusoid-ventricose, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle a layer of loosely interwoven tangled hyphae forming poorly differentiated trichodermium, often with free hyphal tips, occasionally with numerous laticifers; stem cuticle has fertile basidia in upper part, changing to a layer of interwoven hyphae toward base; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  after Alexander H. Smith (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Caloboletus calopus and Caloboletus rubripes have bitter flesh and do not develop red tones on the cap, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Bessette(3)*, Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Ammirati(1)*, Both(1), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)* (as "Boletus" smithii), McAdoo(1)*
12
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus subalpinus  (Trappe & Thiers) M. Nuhn, Manfr. Binder, A.F.S. Taylor, Halling, Hibbett^  Fungal Biology 117 (7-8): 479-511. 2013;  Gastroboletus subalpinus  Trappe and Thiers  Brittonia 21: 245. 1969
ENGLISH NAME(S)  gastroid king-bolete
NOTES  Also listed in Truffles etc. category. Features include 1) a whitish to buff cap, 2) white flesh that does not turn blue, 3) tubes oriented at various angles and often covered by a membrane extending down from cap, 4) whitish pores that finally darken to olive brown, 5) a short stem colored as the cap, and 6) development under the ground under mountain conifers, often with partial exposure at maturity.^ | It is common among false truffles in the Pacific Northwest (Trappe(13)). |According to D. Miller, pers. comm., "This is a sister species of the western queen, Boletus regineus." RANGE ^Boletus subalpinus is fairly common a higher elevations in CA, OR, and Washington, (Bessette), There is a collection from Washington at the University of Washington by P. Matheny in 1996, but Castellano(1)(1999) gives sites only in CA and OR and says "not known from Washington". The type is from Cloud Cap Oregon, not far from Washington.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  5-12cm, convex becoming flat to depressed or somewhat irregular; "whitish to buff or pale tan", sometimes darkening somewhat when old; "smooth to slightly velvety, often pitted and/or wrinkled, not viscid but often covered with dirt and debris"; margin extending down over tubes as thin white membrane that often disappears or breaks up when old^, (Arora), 6-10cm, convex becoming flat to deeply depressed to flat-convex when mature, bolete-like in general appearance, often highly pitted and wrinkled and irregular in outline; "warm buff" to "light buff" to "pale olive buff" to "pinkish cinnamon", unchanging when old or darkening to near "clay color" to "buckthorn brown" (colors from Ridgway); dry to moist, bald to velvety to subtomentose, typically covered with soil and debris; peridium on lateral and undersides of spore-producing area "white, thin, velvety, persistent except for scattered, circular ruptures" over mouths of occasional tubes when old, (Thiers)
FLESH  thick, soft; "white or with yellow to olive discolorations", not turning blue when bruised but sometimes staining pinkish^, (Arora), 0.3-1.5cm thick at disc, tapering to margin, soft; white or on some fruitbodies "with sordid yellowish or olivaceous zones", in some fruitbodies "slowly staining pinkish to grayish lavender when cut", in stem white, unchanging, (Thiers)
PORES  pallid or whitish becoming grayish yellow to buff and finally darkening to olive-brown, not turning blue when bruised; tubes occasionally vertical especially near stem but mostly at various angles, colored more or less like pores^, (Arora), less than 1mm across, colored like tubes, unchanging when bruised; tube layer 1-3cm thick, but markedly decreased in thickness in both directions from thickest area, depressed to seceded from stem, strongly projecting beyond upper cap surface but then covered by the thin, pallid, lateral outer covering; occasionally tubes vertical near stem but mostly curved and oriented 20 degrees from vertical, or angled upward near edges of fruitbody, "dark olive buff" to "pale olive buff", when old becoming "buffy citrine" to "citrine drab", (Ridgway colors), (Thiers), pores round to angular, (Bessette)
STEM  2-6cm x 2-5cm, narrowing downward or sometimes equal or even swollen in lower part, solid; white to buff, sometimes darkening to tan when old, base sometimes orange-yellow; dry, often dirty^, (Arora), 2-5cm x 2-4.5cm at top, base up to 3-4cm wide; subventricose [more or less wide in middle] or narrowing downward, occasionally "equal to bulbous at the base"; dirty white to "warm buff" to "light buff" in some, the base "apricot yellow" (Ridgway colors); dry, but typically covered with adhering debris, bald to velvety to subtomentose with the top reticulate when gleba has seceded, (Thiers), no annulus (Bessette)
ODOR  mild to farinaceous^ (Thiers)
TASTE  mild, pleasant^, (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single to gregarious "in soil or duff under mountain conifers in late spring and summer", developing underground but often partially exposed when mature^, (Arora), single to gregarious, underground or partly emerging, under Pinus albicaulis or Abies magnifica and possibly other conifers of montane and subalpine forests, "Commonly found late spring and summer", (Thiers), developing under soil surface associated with the roots of various Pinaceae above 1550m elevation, particularly Abies magnifica (Red Fir), Pinus albicaulis (Whitebark Pine), and Tsuga mertensiana (Mountain Hemlock), September and October, (Castellano), with Pinus albicaulis, Pinus contorta, Abies, Tsuga mertensiana, at relatively high elevations to the tree line; July to October, (Trappe, M.(3)), spring, summer, fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  unobtainable^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-16(18) x 4.5-6(8) um, elliptic to spindle-shaped, smooth, yellowish to brown^, (Arora), spores 10-16(18) x 4.5-6(8) um, elliptic, oblong to subovate [somewhat oval], "occasionally irregularly constricted near middle", smooth, light yellow to ochraceous in Melzer's reagent and KOH, moderately thick-walled; basidia 4-spored, 40-48 x 8-13 um, clavate, colorless and guttulate in KOH, thin-walled, brachybasidioles 25-40 x 7-12 um, similar in shape and appearance to basidia; cystidia "often abundant when young, especially on the pores, apparently collapsing and appearing infrequently with age, single or sometimes clustered", 24-75 x 7-10 um, subcylindric to clavate to tapered, colorless in KOH and Melzer's reagent, thin-walled; epicutis of peridium on top of fruitbody of densely interwoven, much branched hyphae 4-15 um wide, with erect, tapered, blunt-tipped terminal cells 25-45 x 7-12 um, sparsely scattered over surface; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  means "subalpine, growing below the timber line" (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Boletus barrowsii and Boletus edulis are somewhat similar, but those species have vertical tubes.
SOURCES  Thiers(7) (as Gastroboletus), Arora(1) (as Gastroboletus), Bessette(3)* (as Gastroboletus), Castellano(1)* (as Gastroboletus), Trappe, M.(1)* (as Gastroboletus), Trappe, M.(3)* (as Gastroboletus), Both(1) (as Gastroboletus), Desjardin(6)* (as Gastroboletus), Trappe(13) (as Gastroboletus)
13
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Buchwaldoboletus lignicola  (Kallenb.) Pilat^  Friesia 9: 217. 1969;  Boletus lignicola  Kallenb.;  Xerocomus lignicola  (Kallenb.) Singer;  Gyrodon lignicola  (Kallenb.) Heinem.;  Pulveroboletus lignicola  (Kallenb.) E.A. Dick & Snell
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) reddish brown to yellow brown, tomentose cap, 2) yellow flesh that usually turns blue when cut, 3) decurrent, angular pores that are yellow becoming brownish yellow when old, and staining bluish green when bruised, 4) eccentric, finely powdery stem that is colored like the cap, and 5) growth on or near conifer stumps or sawdust.^ | It often fruits with the polypore Phaeolus schweinitzii (Bessette(3)). RANGE ^Buchwaldoboletus lignicola, also known as Boletus lignicola, has been found in OR (The accompanying photograph of an OR collection was identified based on 99% ITS sequence match to multiple European collections.) It is rare in North America, with distribution in eastern Canada south to PA, west to MI, the limits yet to be established (Bessette(3)). Distribution is NS and ON, south to PA, west to MI, the limits yet to be established, (Both). Distribution specifically includes PQ (Ortiz-Santana). It is also found in Europe from the subarctic south to Switzerland (Ortiz-Santana).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  2.5-10cm across, convex becoming broadly convex, margin inrolled when young; "rusty brown to yellow-brown or rusty golden yellow"; dry, subtomentose, often finely rimose-areolate [cracked] when old, "margin with a narrow band of sterile tissue"^, (Bessette), 5-20cm across, "convex with inrolled margin; reddish brown to yellow-brown or rust; subtomentose, floccose at first, then smooth", (Phillips), tomentose-squamose (Both), soft appressed tomentum is easily removed, "attached to the flesh by a thin gelatinous layer, so that the tomentum can be moved back and forth", (Ortiz-Santana)
FLESH  yellow, usually turning blue when cut, "but sometimes slowly or not at all"^, (Bessette), firm; pale lemon yellow (Phillips)
PORES  1-3 per mm, angular, subdecurrent, "yellow to golden yellow at first", becoming brownish yellow when old, "staining bluish green when bruised"; tubes 0.3-1.2cm deep^, (Bessette), decurrent; "bright yellow, bruising blue-green"; tubes bright yellow, (Phillips), greenish yellow, bruising blue (Both), yellow to golden, bruising greenish blue, (Ortiz-Santana)
STEM  3-8cm x 0.6-2.5cm, "nearly equal or tapered in either direction, usually narrowed at the base, frequently eccentric", solid; "rusty brown to yellow-brown"; dry, finely tomentose, yellow mycelium at base; "partial veil and annulus absent"^, (Bessette), 3.0-8.0 x 0.5-2.5cm, "often eccentric, tapered below"; rust yellow to brown; dry, pulverulent, (Phillips), frequently eccentric; similar in color to cap; finely tomentose, (Both), "basal area sulphur-yellow, ending in a golden-yellow mycelium", (Ortiz-Santana)
ODOR  faintly aromatic^ (Bessette), faint, aromatic, (Phillips), 2 records of unpleasant odor (Ortiz-Santana)
TASTE  weakly acidic or not distinctive^ (Bessette), pleasant (Phillips)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette), edible (Phillips)
HABITAT  single or scattered "on or around conifer stumps or sawdust", July to October^, (Bessette), "always on stumps or trunks of conifers, exceptionally on sawdust", (Phillips), "with white pine and other pines, on and around conifers stumps", (Both), associated with pines, also with Larix (larch), rarely with hardwoods (Prunus avium), (Ortiz-Santana)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown^ (Bessette), olive (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-10 x 3-4 um, elliptic, smooth, yellowish^ (Bessette), spores 6.5-9 x 2.8-3.8 um (Phillips), spores 6-9(12) x 3-4 um, cystidia 29-80 x 4-9 um, (Ortiz-Santana)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'inhabiting wood'
SIMILAR  Both(1) wrote that there was considerable confusion between this species and other similar lignicolous boletes (here considered as Buchwaldoboletus sphaerocephalus and Buchwaldoboletus hemichrysus). Buchwaldoboletus hemichrysus Berkeley and Curtis is similar but has not been documented from the Pacific Northwest. It has a bright golden yellow to orange-yellow cap, "a red-brown to reddish brown pore surface", and a stem tinged with red, (Bessette(3) as Boletus hemichrysus). Buchwaldoboletus sphaerocephalus has a yellow cap and stem.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus lignicola), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus lignicola), Both(1) (as Boletus lignicola), Ortiz-Santana(1)
14
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Buchwaldoboletus sphaerocephalus  (Barla) Watling & T.H. Li, in Watling^  Edinb. J. Bot. 61(1): 46. 2004;  Boletus sphaerocephalus  Barla
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include a yellow, dry to slightly viscid cap that is somewhat tomentose, yellow flesh that turns blue, yellow pores that turn blue then brown, yellow stem that is more or less equal and somewhat matted-fibrillose, and growth on wood or soil near stumps.^ RANGE ^Buchwaldoboletus sphaerocephalus has been recorded from ID, FL west along the Gulf Coast, and MI: the distribution limits remain to be established, (Bessette). Distribution is throughout Europe, from Scandinavia to Italy, in North America from Canada south to FL, along the Gulf Coast to TX, west to MI and ID, (Ortiz-Santana).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh no reaction with FeSO4 (Smith)
CAP  4-10cm, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; sulphur yellow when young, becoming pale yellow to whitish when old; dry to slightly viscid, subtomentose [somewhat tomentose], often areolate [cracked like dried mud] when old^, (Bessette), 5-10cm, convex with incurved irregular margin, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; sulphur-yellow but on aging slowly fading to pallid; subviscid (but no gelatinous layer present), unpolished to subtomentose, when old at times areolate [cracked like dried mud], (Smith)
FLESH  "sulphur-yellow to pale yellow", typically turning blue when exposed, but sometimes slowly or not at all^, (Bessette), thick; sulphur-yellow under the cap surface, paler inward, turning blue when cut; in stem yellow, (Smith)
PORES  1-3 per mm, angular; "yellow at first, becoming dull yellow to brownish yellow", turning blue, then slowly staining brownish when bruised; tube layer 0.8-1.5cm thick, becoming depressed near stem when old^, (Bessette), 2-3 per mm when young, broader when mature, staining blue and then slowly brownish where injured; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, pale sulphur yellow when young, staining blue when injured, (Smith)
STEM  5-10cm x 1-3cm, nearly equal down to tapered base, solid; yellow, with yellow basal mycelium; dry, appressed-fibrillose, lacking reticulation; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 6-10cm x 1-2.5cm, (or larger in giant fruitbodies), central to off-center, narrowed to a point at base, solid; yellow; unpolished, appearing somewhat matted-fibrillose, yellow tomentum and mycelium with debris around base, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), slight (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive or somewhat bitter^ (Bessette), mild to bitterish (Smith)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  "scattered, in groups or clusters in sawdust, or on stumps or the surrounding soil"^, (Bessette)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown^ (Bessette), "olive brownish or tinged ochraceous in the olive-brown range", (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 3-4 um, oblong to elliptic, smooth, yellow^, (Bessette), spores 7-9 x 3-3.5 um, oblong to elliptic, smooth, dull ochraceous in Melzer's reagent, bright yellow in KOH, lacking apical pore, walls slightly thickened; pleurocystidia 33-50 x 9-15 um, "mostly fusoid-ventricose, thin-walled and with ochraceous to rusty ochraceous content as revived in KOH, none seen with incrustation"; cap cuticle of interwoven hyphae, yellow fading to colorless in KOH, incrustation not seen, epicuticular zone compactly interwoven, with hyphal end-cells that have blunt to narrowed apex and some inflated to 8-12 um wide in the midportion; clamp connections absent, (Smith) 
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with spherical head [cap]'
SIMILAR  Both(1) wrote that there was considerable confusion between this species and other similar lignicolous boletes (here considered as Buchwaldoboletus lignicola and Buchwaldoboletus hemichrysus). Buchwaldoboletus hemichrysus Berkeley and Curtis is similar but has not been documented from the Pacific Northwest. It has a bright golden yellow to orange-yellow cap, "a red-brown to reddish brown pore surface", and a stem tinged with red, (Bessette(3) as Boletus hemichrysus). Buchwaldoboletus lignicola has a rusty brown to yellow-brown or rusty golden yellow cap and a stem colored similarly to the cap.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus sphaerocephalus), Smith(35) (as Boletus sphaerocephalus), Both(1) (as Boletus sphaerocephalus), Ortiz-Santana(1), Siegel(2)*
15
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Butyriboletus abieticola  (Thiers) D. Arora & J.L Frank^  Mycologia 106(3): 466. 2014;  Boletus abieticola  Thiers  California Mushrooms pp.39-40. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a cap that is light rose with tan-colored spots interspersed and appearing yellow under shingled fibrillose scales, 2) white to pale yellow flesh that occasionally changes to blue, 3) yellow tubes and pores that change to blue, 4) yellow stem with reddish base and yellow reticulation on upper part, and 5) microscopic characters including spirally incrusted hyphae of the cap cuticle.^ | According to Bessette(3), it is fairly common. RANGE ^Butyriboletus abieticola is found from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Northwest and CA, (Bessette). There are collections from WA at the University of Washington and from OR at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^KOH on flesh pale violaceous, (Thiers)
CAP  9-13cm, convex becoming flat-convex at maturity, margin incurved, entire; "light rose with tan-colored spots interspersed and appearing yellow under the scales"; "dry, appressed fibrillose, forming more or less imbricated fibrillose scales that remain apparent even when dried"^, (Thiers), 5-13cm wide, convex, becoming broadly convex to flat when old, margin incurved and even; "predominantly pinkish to tan on a yellowish ground color"; dry, appressed-fibrillose to fibrillose-scaly, (Bessette)
FLESH  up to 2cm thick; "white to pale yellow, usually unchanging, occasionally slowly changing to blue in irregular areas when exposed"; in stem white except reddish at base, unchanging when exposed^, (Thiers), white to yellowish, unchanging or slowly turning blue erratically, in stem white except for reddish base, unchanging when cut, (Bessette)
PORES  up to 1mm, angular; yellow ("lemon yellow") when young, darkening and with greenish tints when mature, changing to blue when bruised; tube layer 1-2cm thick, "adnate to adnexed, shallowly depressed with age", colored as pores, changing to blue when bruised or exposed^, (Thiers), pores up to 0.1cm wide, pore surface "yellow at first, becoming olive-yellow at maturity, staining blue when bruised", tubes 1-2cm deep, often depressed near stem when old, (Bessette)
STEM  9-12cm x 4-5cm, widening to 5-6cm at widest point, club-shaped to somewhat bulbous, solid; yellow, reddish at base; strongly yellow-reticulate over all but basal part^, (Thiers), 4-12cm x 2.5-5cm, widening downwards, solid; yellow with reddish base, dry, strongly yellow reticulate at least on upper part, often nearly over the whole surface; partial veil and ring absent blueing, (Bessette)
ODOR  mild^ (Thiers), not distinctive (Bessette)
TASTE  mild, sweet^, (Thiers), not distinctive (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Thiers), yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  "scattered or in groups on the ground in conifer forests, especially firs, at higher elevations, August-January"^, (Bessette), rare at lower elevations but not uncommon in the zone characterized by Abies lasiocarpa (Subalpine Fir) / Tsuga mertensiana (Mountain Hemlock), (R. Bishop, pers. comm.), summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown^ (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14-17.5 x 4.5-5.5 um, elliptic to somewhat spindle-shaped to somewhat cylindric in face view, inequilateral and wider in middle in side view, smooth, thin-walled^, pale ochraceous in KOH, ochraceous in Melzer's; basidia 1-, 2-, and 4-spored, 22-27 x 8-10 um, clavate, colorless, guttulate in KOH, hymenium colorless with scattered yellow areas in KOH, bright rust-red color in Melzer's; hymenial cystidia scattered to rare, inconspicuous, 40-50 x 4-7 um, cylindric to pyriform (pear-shaped) to subclavate to subfusoid, colorless in KOH and Melzer's, thin-walled; cap cuticle "a tangled trichodermium of hyphae with occasional erect hyphal tips, hyaline spiral incrustations on most hyphae, contents staining bright red to tawny in Melzer's, hyphae 8-10 um wide"; stem cuticle composed largely of fertile basidia; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores 14-18 x 4.5-6 um, elliptic to subcylindric, smooth, pale ochraceous, (Bessette)
NAME ORIGIN  means "dwelling with Abies [fir]"
SIMILAR  Butyriboletus persolidus (established for California) differs in cap color, does not show the imbricated fibrillose scales on cap, is not noted to be associated with fir, and has slightly smaller spores and differently shaped cystidia, (Thiers). See also SIMILAR section of Butyriboletus autumniregius, Butyriboletus primiregius, and Butyriboletus querciregius.
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus abieticola), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus abieticola), Arora(3), Desjardin(6)* (as Boletus abieticola), Siegel(2)*, McAdoo(1)*
16
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Butyriboletus autumniregius  D. Arora & J.L. Frank^  Mycologia 106(3): 475. 2014;  Boletus regius  Krombh.  (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) large size, 2) cap that is rose red or vinaceous red or at times mottled with tan or yellow, dry, and bald or breaking up into small scales, 3) flesh that is yellow but vinaceous tinged in the stem base, 4) small yellow pores that become greenish, and turn blue when bruised, 5) bulbous to equal stem that is yellow with dark red stains toward base, and yellow-reticulate in upper part, often staining blue when bruised or rubbed, 6) fruiting under conifers and possibly hardwoods, generally in the fall, in mountains or lowlands, and 7) spores with length to width ratio 3.5.^ | The descriptions is derived from Arora(3). RANGE ^Butyriboletus autumniregius collections were examined from CA and OR, (Arora(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  8-30cm across, convex becoming broadly convex when mature or sometimes flat; "wholly or mostly rose red to vinaceous red or at times mottled with tan or yellow"; dry or slightly tacky but not viscid, bald or "breaking up to form many small scales" (the scales typically smaller than in Butyriboletus abieticola)
FLESH  firm, dense, thick; "pale yellow, typically unchanging in the button stage but in age usually turning blue at least somewhat when cut (often slowly and erratically)"; in stem, "firm, pale yellow except for the base, which usually has a distinct vinaceous tinge, turning blue slightly or not at all when cut"
PORES  typically less than 1 millimeter wide, pore surface usually the same color as the tubes which are "pale yellow becoming bright yellow and eventually olive yellow or greenish", pore surface "typically turning blue quickly when bruised except in the button stage"; tubes at first short in relation to the cap flesh but 1-2.5cm or longer when mature
STEM  5-15(25)cm x 3-7cm at top, usually clavate [club-shaped] "and sometimes markedly bulbous when young, but often less so (at times equal) with age"; "butter yellow to bright yellow throughout or commonly with dark red (rhubarb red) stains toward the base, often bruising blue when touched or rubbed"; finely reticulate over at least upper part, "the reticulation yellow or occasionally reddish but often becoming brown after spores are shed"
ODOR  
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or in groups on the ground in coastal and mid-elevation forests, "associated with conifers and possibly also with hardwoods", has been observed in pure stands of Douglas-fir; fruiting generally in the fall (September to December)
SPORE DEPOSIT  spores dark olive brown in mass, at least under microscope
MICROSCOPIC  spores (12)13-16.5(18) x 4-5 um (length to width ratio 3.5), fusoid, smooth, thin-walled, "pale brown or yellowish in KOH"^; basidia 4-spored, clavate; "hymenial cystidia fusoid-ventricose"; cap cuticle "an interwoven trichodermium with few erect hyphal tips"
NAME ORIGIN  "autumni" refers to autumn fruiting, and "regius" means "kingly" and also refers to the European Butyriboletus regius
SIMILAR  Butyriboletus primiregius is best distinguished by fruiting in the spring. The cap has a pronounced tendency, lacking in B. autumniregius, to fade to dingy olive brown or paler when it is exposed to sunlight, but this could be environmental. (Arora(3)). |Butyriboletus querciregius 1) grows with oak, 2) has shorter spores and a smaller length to width ratio (3.0), and 3) has a less vivid cap color (pinkish red, pinkish brown, or yellowish when fresh as opposed to tending toward deep rose red or vinaceous red when fresh). The cap color of the cap of B. querciregius is also referred to as "red or dull red or even orange-red, sometimes blotched with yellow before fading to pinkish brown, tan or yellowish". (Arora(3)). |Butyriboletus abieticola has fibrillose scales when mature. (Arora(3)). |Butyriboletus regius, known from Europe turns blue only rarely when cut. (Arora(3)).
SOURCES  Arora(3)*
17
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Butyriboletus persolidus  (Schaeffer) D. Arora & J.L. Frank^  Mycologia 106(3): 471. 2014;  Boletus appendiculatus  (Schaeff.) Secr. sensu Thiers  California Mushrooms: A Field Guide to the Boletes: 41. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  butter bolete, oak bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) an almost bald cap that is tan to brown, varying to cinnamon brown or yellowish brown, sometimes with rusty brown areas but lacking pinkish to vinaceous tints, 2) thick, dense flesh with a mild taste, 3) yellow tubes and pores that usually bruise blue quickly except in the button state, the pore surface rarely slightly reddish, 4) a clavate or bulbous stem when young that becomes more equal, the color yellow, though sometimes with brownish or reddish stains especially downward, with a finely netting (at least over the upper part) that is yellow often becoming brown, and 5) fruiting under oak, tanoak, or chinquapin in fall.^ |The description is derived from Arora(3). RANGE ^The photographs by M. Beug and A. and O. Ceska are candidates from WA and BC respectively. This species has been confirmed genetically only from CA where it occurs "in both the coastal region and in the Sierra Nevada foothills" (Arora(3)). |The holotype is from CA. |It has been known as Boletus appendiculatus (Schaeff.) Secr. sensu Theirs. Arora(3) comment "Reports of Boletus appendiculatus sensu Thiers under conifers in the Pacific Northwest (e.g. Tylutki 1987) appear to be misidentifications based on Butyriboletus abieticola, Bu. primiregius and/or Bu. autumniregius. However, reports of Boletus appendiculatus with Q. garryana on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, are likely based on either this species and/or Bu. querciregius.", (Arora(3), with Latin names italicized). A collection from BC at the University of British Columbia as Boletus appendiculatus could be Butyriboletus persolidus or Butyriboletus querciregius.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  8-25(30)cm across, convex becoming broadly convex or sometimes flat; "mostly tan to brown but at times cinnamon-brown and at other times, yellowish brown to buff, sometimes with darker rusty brown blushes"; dry or slightly tacky but not viscid, bald "but typically with a fine pallid bloom when young".
FLESH  firm, dense, thick; "pale yellow, typically unchanging in the button stage but with age usually turning blue at least somewhat when cut (often slowly and erratically but more dramatically in older specimens)"
PORES  "typically less than 1 mm broad", both pore surface and tubes "usually pale yellow becoming bright yellow and eventually olive yellow", pore surface "rarely slightly reddish", "typically turning blue quickly when bruised except in the button stage"; tubes at first short in relation to the cap flesh, but 1-2cm long or longer when mature
STEM  5-15(25)cm x 3-7cm thick at the top, "usually clavate or bulbous when young but often equal or with a slightly tapered base when mature"; "butter-yellow to bright yellow throughout, although sometimes also with brownish or reddish stains especially downward"; "finely reticulate over at least the upper portion, the reticulation yellow but often becoming brownish after spores are shed"
ODOR  
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or in groups "in soil under hardwoods or in mixed forests", usually associated with Quercus agrifolia (California Live Oak), probably with other trees in Fagaceae, e.g. Notholithocarpus densiflorus (Tanoak), Chrysolepis chrysophylla (Golden Chinquapin); typically fruiting October to December in California
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-15 x 4-5 um, subfusoid, smooth, thin-walled, "pale brown or yellowish in KOH"^; basidia 4-spored, clavate; hymenial cystidia fusoid-ventricose; cap cuticle "an interwoven trichodermium with few if any erect hyphal tips"
NAME ORIGIN  from "per", Latin for "very" and "solidus", Latin for "solid" or "dense"
SIMILAR  Butyriboletus querciregius is another similar oak species but softer-fleshed, with a reddish or pinkish cap (fading to yellow-brown), much more likely to have blushes of red on the stem. The cap is "often blotched with yellow or pink" while that of B. persolidus "tends to remain evenly brown". Arora(3). |Caloboletus marshii has a bitter taste, paler cap, and non-reticulate stem, (Arora(1)). |See also SIMILAR section of Butyriboletus abieticola.
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus appendiculatus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus appendiculatus), Arora(1)* (as Boletus appendiculatus), Both(1) (as Boletus appendiculatus), AroraPocket(1)* (as Boletus appendiculatus), Arora(3), Siegel(2)*
18
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Butyriboletus primiregius  D. Arora & J.L. Frank^  Mycologia 106(3): 474. 2014;  Boletus regius Krombh.  (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) large size, 2) cap that is red or vinaceous red (the color often fading when exposed to sunlight), dry, and bald or breaking up into small scales, 3) flesh that is yellow but vinaceous tinged in the stem base, 4) small yellow pores that become greenish, and turn blue when bruised, 5) bulbous to equal stem that is yellow with dark red stains toward base, and yellow-reticulate in upper part, staining blue when bruised or rubbed, 6) fruiting under true fir and other conifers in the mountains in spring, and 7) spores with length to width ratio 3.5.^ | The description is derived from Arora(3). RANGE ^Collections were examined from CA, OR, and ID, (Arora(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  8-25(30)cm across, convex becoming broadly convex when mature or at times flat or undulating [wavy]; "at first wholly or mostly dark red or vinaceous red (but color often obscured by a layer of brown dust), often developing dingy brown, tan, ocher-brown or dingy olive brown tones as it ages or is exposed to light", "the vinaceous red tints sometimes disappearing entirely or more often remaining visible at least near the margin"; dry or slightly tacky but not viscid, bald or breaking up to form many scales (the scales much smaller than in Butyriboletus abieticola)
FLESH  firm, dense, thick; "pale yellow, typically unchanging in the button stage but at maturity usually turning blue at least somewhat when cut (often slowly and erratically and most pronounced just above the tube layer)"; in stem "firm, yellow except for the base, which usually has a distinct vinaceous tinge, not turning blue or turning blue only slightly when cut but larval tunnels often rhubarb red"
PORES  typically less than 1 millimeter wide, pore surface usually the same color as the tubes which are "pale yellow becoming bright yellow and eventually olive yellow or greenish", pore surface "typically turning blue quickly when bruised except in the button stage"; tubes at first short in relation to the cap flesh but 1-2cm or longer when mature
STEM  5-15(25)cm x 2-7cm wide at top, usually clavate [club-shaped] or bulbous when young but often more or less equal when old; "butter yellow to bright yellow throughout or commonly with dark red (rhubarb red) stains toward the base, often bruising blue when touched or rubbed"; finely reticulate over at least the upper part, "the reticulation yellow but often becoming brownish after spores are shed, rarely reddish"; base often ending in one or more root-like processes deep in the soil
ODOR  
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or in groups in soil under conifers (primarily Abies), fruiting in late spring and early summer (May to July), in the mountains, not known from the coastal region
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark olive brown, at least in mass under microscope
MICROSCOPIC  spores (12)13-17(18) x 3.5-5 um, length to width ratio 3.5, fusoid, smooth, thin-walled, "pale brown or yellowish in KOH"^; basidia 4-spored, clavate; "hymenial cystidia fusoid-ventricose"; cap cuticle "an interwoven trichodermium with few if any erect hyphal tips"
NAME ORIGIN  from "primi" meaning "first" because it is the first butter bolete to fruit in the year in the western USA mountains, and "regius" meaning "kingly" and referring also to the European Butyriboletus regius
SIMILAR  Butyriboletus autumniregius fruits in fall, and the cap does not tend to fade as much (which could be due to environment) (Arora(3)). |Butyriboletus querciregius 1) grows with oak, 2) has shorter spores and a smaller length to width ratio (3.0), and 3) has the cap color described differently (pinkish red, pinkish brown, or yellowish when fresh). The cap color of the cap of B. querciregius is also referred to as "red or dull red or even orange-red, sometimes blotched with yellow before fading to pinkish brown, tan or yellowish". (Arora(3)). |Butyriboletus regius, known from Europe turns blue only rarely when cut (Arora(3)). |Butyriboletus abieticola has fibrillose scales when mature (Arora(3)).
SOURCES  Arora(3)*
19
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Butyriboletus querciregius  D. Arora & J. L. Frank^  Mycologia 106(3): 476. 2014;  Boletus regius Krombh.  (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) large size, 2) cap that is reddish or dull red, often with yellow parts, dry, and bald or breaking up into small scales, 3) flesh that is yellow but vinaceous tinged in the stem base, 4) small yellow pores that become greenish, and turn blue when bruised, 5) bulbous to equal stem that is yellow with dark red to dark red blushes toward base, and yellow-reticulate in upper part, staining blue when bruised or rubbed, 6) fruiting under oak, usually in fall, and 7) spores with length to width ratio 3.0.^ | The description is derived from Arora(3). RANGE ^Collections were examined from WA and CA, and its DNA sequence occurred on a Quercus garryana root tip in OR, (Arora(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  6-20(25)cm across, convex becoming broadly convex when mature or sometimes flat; dry or slightly tacky but not viscid; "reddish or dull red when young and fresh or yellow overlain with red (i.e. reddish orange overall with more yellow at the margin) or red blotched with yellow but often fading to pale reddish brown, pinkish tan, yellow or yellowish buff with age or where exposed to light"; bald "or occasionally breaking up to form some small scales"
FLESH  "firm, thick"; "pale yellow, typically unchanging in the button stage" but when old "usually turning blue at least somewhat when cut"; in stem "firm, pale yellow except for the base, which usually has a distinct vinaceous tinge, turning blue little if at all when cut"
PORES  typically less than 1 millimeter wide, pore surface usually the same color as the tubes which are "pale yellow becoming bright yellow and eventually olive yellow or greenish", pore surface "typically turning blue quickly when bruised except in the button stage"; tubes at first short in relation to the cap flesh but 1-2cm or longer when mature
STEM  5-15(20)cm x 2-6cm at top, usually clavate [club-shaped] or slightly bulbous when young, often more or less equal when old; "butter yellow to bright yellow throughout or with beautiful red to dark red blushes toward the base, sometimes bruising blue when pressed but variable in this respect", finely reticulate over at least the upper part, "the reticulation yellow or occasionally reddish but often becoming brown after spores are shed"
ODOR  
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or in groups in leaf litter under oak (mainly Quercus agrifolia and Q. garryana, less commonly with other Quercus spp.); mostly fruiting in fall (September to December) but has been found in May and in June
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark olive brown, at least in mass under microscope
MICROSCOPIC  spores (10)11-15(16) x 3.5-5 um, length to width ratio 3.0, fusoid, smooth, thin-walled, "pale brown or yellowish in KOH"^; basidia 4-spored, clavate; "hymenial cystidia mostly fusoid-ventricose"; cap cuticle "an interwoven trichodermium with few erect hyphal tips"
NAME ORIGIN  from "querci" meaning "pertaining to oak" and "regius" meaning "kingly" and referring also to the European Butyriboletus regius
SIMILAR  Butyriboletus persolidus is a similar oak species with a brownish cap, and a stem less likely to have red tones than B. querciregius. The cap "tends to remain evenly brown" while the cap of B. querciregius is "often blotched with yellow or pink", (Arora(3)). |Butyriboletus primiregius fruits in the spring and the cap color is described differently. |Butyriboletus autumniregius 1) has not been found to form ectomycorrhizal associations with oak, 2) has a more vivid cap color "(tending toward deep rose red or vinaceous red when fresh rather than pinkish red, pinkish brown or yellowish)", and 3) has longer spores with a larger length to width ratio (3.5). |Butyriboletus abieticola has fibrillose scales when mature and is associated with conifers, especially Abies (true fir), (Arora(3)).|Butyriboletus regius, known from Europe, turns blue only rarely when cut, (Arora(3)). 
SOURCES  Arora(3)*, Arora(1)* (photo as Boletus regius), Siegel(2)*
20
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Butyriboletus regius  (Krombholz) D. Arora & J.L. Frank  group^  Mycologia 106(3): 466. 2013;  Boletus regius  Krombh.
ENGLISH NAME(S)  red-capped butter bolete, royal bolete
NOTES  Butyriboletus regius group is distinguished by its pink to reddish cap, yellow pores which in the Pacific Northwest stain blue, yellow flesh, and large thick reticulate stem, (Arora 1986).^ | The true Butyriboletus regius is known from Europe. Its relatives in western North America have been redescribed as Butyriboletus querciregius, Butyriboletus primiregius, and Butyriboletus autumniregius (see separate entries). These species are separated (though not markedly) by molecular methods, and differ also in habitat, fruiting season, the extent of pinkish to vinaceous coloring, the presence of fibrillose scales on cap, and subtle differences in spore size. RANGE ^Members of this group are found at least in WA, OR, and CA (Arora(1)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface pale purplish with application of FeSO4, flesh grayish with application of FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  6-20cm or more, convex to flat or somewhat irregular; "pink to rosy-red or dark red, sometimes also with brownish tones or yellow areas"; "smooth to uneven or pitted, sometimes minutely hairy when young, dry or slightly viscid"^, (Arora(1)), 7-20cm, convex to nearly flat, margin incurved at first, with narrow band of tissue or sometimes even; "rose-pink to rose-red, sometimes with yellow or brown tones, especially near the margin"; dry, velvety-subtomentose at first, becoming bald at maturity, often pitted or wrinkled, especially when old, (Bessette), 8-20cm, convex to broadly convex when young, unchanging or becoming flat-convex to irregular in outline when old, typically very massive; bright pink to rose pink during all stages, occasionally with brown areas when young, and often becoming somewhat yellowish toward margin when old, or may fade to almost yellow with only pinkish spots or flushes; dry to moist, tomentose to velvety when young, unchanging or becoming bald when old, sometimes highly uneven and conspicuously pitted during all stages, (Thiers)
FLESH  very thick, firm; yellow, slowly and erratically turning blue when exposed, in base often pinkish or vinaceous^, (Arora(1)), yellow, typically turning blue slowly and erratically when exposed, (Bessette), 1.5-4.5cm thick, intense yellow, slowly and incompletely changing to blue when exposed; in stem "yellow in cortical region, changing to whitish or pallid in center", reddish to pale vinaceous at the base, unchanging when exposed, (Thiers)
PORES  bright yellow becoming darker yellow or olive yellow when old, usually turning blue when bruised, tubes yellow^, (Arora(1)), 1-2 per mm, angular; bright yellow becoming darker yellow, turning blue when bruised; tubes 0.8-2.5cm deep, depressed near stem, (Bessette), 0.5-1mm wide, angular, colored as tubes, turning blue when bruised; tube layer 1-2.5cm thick, adnexed when young, becoming deeply and broadly depressed when old, bright yellow when young, unchanging or becoming deeper yellow when old, turning blue when exposed, (Thiers)
STEM  4-14cm x 2.5-6cm, usually bulbous or thicker in lower part, often short in relation to cap, solid, "pale to bright yellow but usually bruising blue and often reddish-stained in lower part"; "finely reticulate over at least the upper half"^, (Arora(1)), 5-13.5cm x 2.5-5cm, widening downward and often bulbous, typically with ventricose base, solid; "bright yellow, often with reddish tints, especially near the base"; dry, fine yellow reticulation overall or at least on upper half; partial veil and ring absent, (Bessette), 7-11.5cm x 3-5cm at top, "usually conspicuously bulbous, sometimes clavate-bulbous or abruptly bulbous to ventricose", solid; bright yellow, "dry, finely but distinctly reticulate for two thirds of or entire length", reticulations colored as surface, (Thiers)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Thiers)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Thiers)
EDIBILITY  edible (Bessette)
HABITAT  single to gregarious in woods^ (Arora(1)), single, scattered or in groups under oaks or conifers, especially firs, August to November or sometimes May to June, (Bessette), spring, summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown^, (Bessette), pale olive-brown to olive-brown (Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12.5-16.5 x 3.5-5 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth^, (Arora(1)), spores 12-17 x 4-5 um, elliptic to fusoid [spindle-shaped], smooth, colorless to pale ochraceous, (Bessette), spores 12.5-16.5 x 3.7-5 um, elliptic to fusoid to subcylindric, smooth, ochraceous in Melzer's reagent, pale ochraceous to colorless in KOH, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 27-32 x 7-9 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia scattered to numerous, (more abundant on pores), 25-45 x 8-17 um, clavate to fusoid to subcylindric, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle "a trichodermium of tangled to somewhat repent hyphae with free, more or less erect hyphal tips, appearing amyloid"; stem cuticle a layer of fertile basidia and hymeniform to vesiculose cells with interspersed caulocystidia similar to the hymenial cystidia; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  means "regal, magnificent" (Both)
SIMILAR  Boletus abieticola has fibrillose scales at maturity (Arora(3)).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus regius), Thiers(1) (as Boletus regius), Arora(1)* (as Boletus regius), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Boletus regius), Both(1) (as Boletus regius), Buczacki(1)* (as Boletus regius), Arora(3)*
21
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Caloboletus 'calopus'  (Pers.) Vizzini^  Index Fungorum 146: 1. 2014;  Boletus calopus  Fr. 
ENGLISH NAME(S)  bitter bolete
NOTES  The Pacific Northwest status of boletes resembling Caloboletus calopus is not clear - some collections labeled as that species could be Caloboletus rubripes. Features of Caloboletus calopus include brown cap, yellow pores, a reticulated stem that is yellow to red, flesh and pores that turn rapidly blue when damaged, and bitter taste.^ |Caloboletus frustosus (Snell & E.A. Dick) D. Arora & J.L. Frank [also known as Boletus calopus var. frustosus] is said by Bessette(3) to have "a conspicuously rimose-areolate to fissured yellowish brown to grayish brown pileus at maturity" to which Boletus calopus var. calopus is "almost identical but has a nearly smooth pileus that does not become conspicuously rimose-areolate to fissured at maturity". The Bessette(3) description of the cap context says "unchanging when exposed" for var. frustosus and "rapidly staining when cut" for var. calopus, and the spore measurements given are different as well. But according to Siegel(2), based on preliminary genetic analysis, it is possible that Caloboletus frustosus is the same species as Caloboletus conifericola - if so the name Caloboletus frustosus would take precedence. RANGE ^Caloboletus calopus var. calopus is said to be fairly common in the Pacific Northwest, and also occurs in MI, NH, and NY, (Bessette as Boletus calopus var. calopus). There are collections at the University of Washington labeled as Boletus calopus (variety not specified) from Washington and Oregon. There is a collection from BC as Boletus calopus at the University of British Columbia. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains yellow-brown with application of KOH and olive-green with FeSO4 (Bessette)
CAP  6-20cm, obtuse becoming convex to broadly convex, margin incurved at first, often with narrow band of sterile tissue; "olive-brown to gray-brown at first, becoming paler olive-brown to dark yellow-brown in age"; dry, somewhat tomentose when young, becoming nearly smooth when mature, usually rimose-areolate [cracked like dried mud] over disc when old^, (Bessette), 10-30cm, convex to flat or irregular; dull brown to olive-brown, grayish brown, or olive-buff, sometimes yellow-brown or when old darker brown; "dry, dull, smooth to minutely hairy or fibrillose", often areolate [cracked like dried mud] when old, (Arora), dull buffy tan to olive-brown or yellow-brown, (Phillips)
FLESH  "whitish to pale yellow, rapidly staining blue when cut"^, (Bessette), very thick; "pale yellow or whitish, quickly blueing when exposed", (Arora)
PORES  1-2 per mm, round, becoming angular when mature; pale yellow at first, becoming olive-yellow when mature, rapidly turning blue when bruised; tubes up to 2cm long, often depressed near stem when old^, (Bessette), pale yellow becoming darker or dingier yellow when old, typically bruising blue or blue-green quickly; tubes similar, (Arora)
STEM  7-15cm x 2-5cm, nearly equal or widening downward, solid; "carmine-red to nearly scarlet, typically dark brownish toward the base and yellowish toward the apex", dry, conspicuously reticulate [netted] at least over upper part, the reticulation whitish to pinkish^, (Bessette), 6-15(20)cm x 3-7cm, equal or bulbous, solid, firm; "yellow, but usually with pink to red zones or discolorations also present, or sometimes entirely reddish", turning blue when bruised; top or upper half finely reticulate, (Arora), yellow to slightly orange-yellow, reticulum whitish, base pinkish, (Phillips)
ODOR  somewhat pungent or not distinctive^ (Bessette)
TASTE  bitter^ (Bessette), distinctly and persistently bitter (Arora)
EDIBILITY  unknown, bitter, (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, scattered or in groups on ground in conifer or mixed forests, sometimes with oak^, (Bessette), "solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in mixed woods and under conifers in the late summer and fall (or occasionally spring)", (Arora)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown^ (Bessette), dark olive-brown (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-19 x 5-6 um, elliptic, smooth, yellowish^; conspicuous amyloid septa are found in cap trama and hymenophoral trama, (Bessette), spores 13-19 x 4-6 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth, (Arora), spores 10.8-15.6 x 3.7-5.1 um, fusiform-elliptic, smooth, yellowish, thick-walled, with droplets; basidia 4-spored, 33-48 x 10-13 um, clavate, without basal clamp connection; cheilocystidia 35-50 x 7-12 um, fusiform, pleurocystidia 50-80 x 8-10 um, fusiform; cap cuticle a trichoderm of intertwined hyphae, some erect and exserted, 3-7 um wide, with brownish pigmentation, septa without clamp connections; caulocystidia on the center of the stem 50-90 x 18-27 um, fusiform to rostrate, thick-walled, (Breitenbach), spores 14-17 x 4-6 um, elliptic to subfusoid, smooth, inamyloid, colorless to pale yellow in KOH, moderately thick-walled; basidia 4-spored, 30-45 x 10-13 um, clavate; hymenial cystidia scattered, inconspicuous, 33-48 x 5-10 um, narrowly fusoid-ventricose to cylindric, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle "a loosely interwoven trichodermium staining ochraceous in KOH with numerous free hyphal tips, often showing incrustations, hyphae 6-10 um wide"; stem cuticle a layer of basidia and cystidia similar to hymenium, (Thiers for var. frustosus)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'beautiful stem'
SIMILAR  Other large bitter boletes are Caloboletus conifericola, with yellow stem (having no red) and darker (olive-gray to deep brown) cap, and Caloboletus rubripes with a non-reticulate stem, (Arora). Caloboletus marshii has a non-reticulate stem and lacks conspicuous red on the stem (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Boletus smithii and Caloboletus conifericola.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus calopus), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus calopus), Arora(1) (as Boletus calopus), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Boletus calopus), Thiers(1) (as Boletus calopus var. frustosus), Breitenbach(3)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)
22
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Caloboletus conifericola  Vizzini^  Index Fungorum 146: 1. 2014;  Boletus coniferarum  E.A. Dick and Snell
ENGLISH NAME(S)  conifer Boletus, bitter Bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) dark olive-gray to gray-brown cap, 2) white to pale yellow flesh that turns instantly blue when bruised, 3) yellow to olivaceous pores that turn instantly blue when bruised, 4) yellow stem with olive-brown to blackish tints near base, 5) fine reticulation [network pattern] on upper stem, and 6) bitter taste.^ |The description is derived from Bessette except where indicated. |According to Siegel(2), based on preliminary genetic analysis, it is possible that Caloboletus frustosus (first described in California, with salmon to red lower stem) is the same species as Caloboletus conifericola. According to D. Miller, pers. comm, DNA from Washington matches that of California specimens identified as Caloboletus frustosus. If the two are synonyms, the name Caloboletus frustosus would take precedence. (See Caloboletus calopus for further details.) |While collections of Caloboletus conifericola from BC and WA do not generally have any red colors, there are red stem colors in the original Snell(2) description of Boletus frustosus from CA: The stem was described as "very thick, subcylindric or ventricose, usually with a fusiform base, finely reticulate most of length, pruinose-furfuraceous to almost subtomentose above, glabrescent below, often fibrillosely cracked, brown, tinged red at the apex, cracks yellow; within whitish to whitish-yellow, red at the base, tinged red throughout, changing to blue only in center". RANGE ^Caloboletus conifericola is found in BC, WA, OR, and AK, (Bessette). It has been reported from ID (A. Parker, pers. comm., K. Chadwick, pers. comm.). Caloboletus conifericola is found rarely in Humboldt and Del Norte counties in CA (Desjardin(6)). Caloboletus frustosus is said to be fairly common from the Rocky Mountains of Idaho west to Washington and south to California, (Bessette as Boletus calopus var. frustosus). There is also a 1942 collection from Oregon as Boletus frustosus at the University of Washington.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  7.5-30cm, margin incurved at first; dark olive-gray becoming grayish brown or dark brown, sometimes streaked reddish or blackish; subtomentose to bald, often cracked or cracked-areolate when old^, (Bessette), up to 15cm, milky coffee color or "grayish brown to dark brown, at times with slight tinges of red and black, where handled the lighter colors becoming darker brown to blackish"; "outer portions finely diffract", (Dick), surface unpolished to somewhat velvety (Trudell)
FLESH  white to pale yellow, becoming instantly blue when exposed^, (Bessette), "white to pale yellow, with some areas of pinkish or pale red, instantly changing to clear blue"; in stem white or yellow in upper part, more yellow downward, basal part deep reddish brown, changing instantly to clear blue, (Dick)
PORES  2-3 per mm, round to angular; "pale yellow to olivaceous at first, becoming dingy yellow at maturity, instantly blueing when bruised"; tube layer 1-2.5cm thick^, (Bessette), minute; pale yellow, lemon-yellow to olivaceous, later dingy yellow or dingy buff, instantly changing to clear blue and eventually to brown when bruised; tube layer depressed-subdecurrent, the same color except change to brown not mentioned, (Dick)
STEM  5-12cm x 2-5cm, widening downward or sometimes equal; "pale yellow to yellow with olive-brown to blackish tints near the base, lacking reddish coloration, rapidly blueing when bruised"; finely reticulate [with netted pattern] on upper part or nearly overall, "or sometimes very obscurely reticulate"^, (Bessette), 11cm long and 4cm wide at top, more or less equal or somewhat bulbous, widest parts up to 5.5cm wide; "pale yellow to yellow, with tinges of reddish brown in scattered areas, the very base olivaceous-brown or dark brown to black, changing everywhere to blue where handled"; subglabrous [nearly bald] or minutely furfuraceous, "finely double-reticulate to the base", (Dick), 10-15cm x 3-6cm (Phillips)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Thiers), pleasant (Phillips)
TASTE  bitter^ (Bessette, Dick)
EDIBILITY  no, because bitter, (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, scattered or in groups under conifers^, (Bessette)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown^ (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-16.5 x 4-5.5(6) um, elliptic to oblong-elliptic, pale yellowish green in 2% KOH^; cheilocystidia and pleurocystidia scarce, 27-47 x 7-10 um, "ventricose to ventricose-rostrate with short necks thin or thick, some necks bent or twisted", colorless, a few pale yellow; hyphae of cap surface, flesh, and trama "staining very pale gray to gray in Melzer's solution, the crosswalls with a distinct peripheral amyloid ring", (Dick), spores 12-17 x 4-6 um, elliptic to oblong-elliptic, smooth, yellowish, (Bessette)
NAME ORIGIN  means "occurring with conifers"^ (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Caloboletus calopus has an olive-brown to brown cap and stem "with carmine-red that does not stain blue when bruised", (Bessette). C. calopus is more reticulate (Phillips). Caloboletus frustosus has conspicuously cracked cap surface when mature and pink to reddish color on stem, (Trudell(4) as Boletus calopus var. frustosus).
SOURCES  Dick(1) (as Boletus coniferarum), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus coniferarum), Trudell(4)* (as Boletus coniferarum), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus coniferarum), Ammirati(1)* (as Boletus coniferarum), Thiers(1) (as Boletus coniferarum), Both(1) (as Boletus coniferarum), Desjardin(6) (as Boletus coniferarum), Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*, Snell(2) (original description of Boletus frustosus), MacKinnon(1)*
23
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Caloboletus marshii  D. Arora, C.F. Schwarz & J.L. Frank^  Index Fungorum 194: 1. 2014
ENGLISH NAME(S)  Ben's bitter bolete
NOTES  Features of Caloboletus marshii include 1) dry to slightly viscid, whitish dry cap that becomes buff or tan when old, the surface dry to slightly viscid, faintly velvety and with a whitish bloom when young, 2) yellow pores and tubes, 3) blue injury reaction of flesh, tubes, pores, and stem, 4) yellow, bulbous, non-reticulate stem, 5) bitter taste, and 6) occurrence with oaks.^ RANGE ^Caloboletus marshii is known from CA to OR and WA (Frank).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  6-15(20)cm across, convex becoming broadly convex, "margin often projecting slightly beyond the tube layer (curblike) when young"; white to grayish white becoming buff or tan when old; "dry or very slightly viscid when wet, faintly velvety and with a fine whitish, powdery bloom when young"^, (Frank), 5-25cm across, convex to nearly flat or somewhat irregular; "whitish to gray, pale grayish-brown or buff when young, becoming dull brownish" and developing darker brown stains when old or upon handling; dry, smooth or cracking when old, (Arora)
FLESH  "pallid and readily bruising blue or gray-blue when fresh" but often only weakly so when old; stem flesh "often marked with zones of contrasting colors", upper yellow parts colored as cap flesh and usually turning blue when cut, dull yellowish to dingy brown or even reddish brown at or below the mid-point and turning blue less strongly or not at all; extreme base usually covered in a thin or thick (0.05-0.3cm) yellow rind of tissue^, (Frank), "thick, dense"; "white or grayish, turning blue to bluish-gray erratically when exposed", (Arora)
PORES  pores less than 0.1cm in diameter, concolorous with tube layer, "staining blue when fresh, the blue stains becoming deep grayish-blue and finally changing to brown"; tube layer 1-3cm deep, "pale yellow becoming yellow and then olive-yellow", or when old dingy olive-gray^, (Frank), pores and tubes "pale yellow becoming dingy yellow or olive-yellow, bruising blue quickly, then eventually turning dingy brown", (Arora)
STEM  5-15cm x 2-7cm, "narrowest at the apex and swollen or bulbous below with the base often narrowed and/or knobby and radicating, typically terminating in a knotted tuft of yellow rhizomorphs"; stem surface "pale yellow to yellow, sometimes with small reddish dots or splotches (especially where damaged by invertebrates), and often stained dingy brownish toward base" (more so when old), yellow parts typically turning blue when handled; stem not reticulate^, (Frank), 4-15cm x 2-5cm at top, usually enlarged in lower part but sometimes tapered at the base; pallid to buff or yellow in upper part, "sometimes with a very slight reddish zone", dingy brown in lower part, darker brown throughout when old; turning blue when bruised; smooth, not reticulate, (Arora)
ODOR  "rather distinctive, somewhat sour"^ (Frank)
TASTE  "distinctly bitter in fresh specimens at least for most people, but sometimes indistinctly in old or waterlogged specimens"^ (Frank), "bitter, at least latently", (Arora), slightly sweet at first then slowly somewhat bitter (the sweetness cutting the bitter sensation), (M. Beug, pers. comm.)
EDIBILITY  inedible (Arora)
HABITAT  single "or in groups or small clusters on ground in association with oaks", especially Quercus agrifolia (California Live Oak) but not limited to that species, also with Quercus garryana (Oregon White Oak)^, (Frank), single to gregarious on ground near or under live oak in summer and early fall (Arora)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "dark olive-brown in mass"^ (Frank), olive-brown (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-14 x 4.5-6 um, short fusoid or long elliptic "with a weak abaxial curve", "smooth, pale brown or yellowish in KOH"^; basidia clavate, mostly 4-spored; "hymenial cystidia mostly fusoid-ventricose"; cap cuticle "an entangled upright layer of sinuous, cylindrical hyphae", (Frank), spores 11-14 x 4.5-6 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  "Named after Ben Marsh, who found it near the type locality in 1972" and brought it to the attention of David Arora "after unsuccessfully trying to make it palatable"^ (Frank)
SIMILAR  Caloboletus calopus has a reticulate stem (Arora). Caloboletus rubripes lacks the pale cap and has red color on the stem (Arora). C. rubripes shows red on the stem and associates with conifers, (Frank). Butyriboletus persolidus (as Boletus appendiculatus) lacks the pale cap color and the bitter taste, and has a reticulate stem, (Arora). B. persolidus has a brown cap, mild taste, yellow reticulate stem, and yellow flesh that turns blue erratically, (Frank). Boletus barrowsii lacks the bitter taste, has a reticulate stem, and has white pores when young (Arora). B. barrowsii has a sweet or nutty taste, reticulate stem, and non-blueing flesh, (Frank).
SOURCES  Frank(5), Arora(1)* (as Boletus "marshii"), Siegel(2)*
24
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Caloboletus rubripes  (Thiers) Vizzini^  Index Fungorum 146: 1. 2014;  Boletus rubripes  Thiers;  Caloboletus calopus  (Pers.) Vizzini  (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  bitter bolete, red-stemmed bitter bolete
NOTES  Features include a pale buff to tan cap, yellow flesh and pores that turn blue on exposure, a smooth stem that when young is yellow at the top and red at the base but when old is typically dark red throughout, and a usually bitter taste.^ RANGE ^Caloboletus rubripes is found in the Pacific Northwest, Southwest, and Mexico, and is especially common in NM and CO, (Bessette). It is specifically found in WA and OR (collections at the University of Washington), and is recorded also from ID and CA, (Michelle Seidl, pers. comm.). It has been reported from MT (Larry Evans, pers. comm.), A Paul Kroeger collection from BC is deposited at University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains yellow-orange with application of KOH (Bessette)
CAP  6-15(25)cm, convex, sometimes becoming flat; "pale buff to olive-buff to tan"; dry, dull, smooth or velvety, often cracked or furrowed when old^, (Arora), 4-18cm, convex to cushion-shaped, expanding, margin incurved to inrolled for a long time, even; "buff to olive-buff to olive-brown, staining brown when bruised"; "dry, velvety-tomentose to appressed-fibrillose", often cracked-areolate when old, (Bessette), pale buff to dull tawny brown, darker where handled (Phillips), when young pale buff, unchanging or becoming pale brown when old, sometimes fading to buff on the margin, typically staining brown when bruised or handled, (Thiers)
FLESH  thick, firm; "buff to pale yellow or even whitish", but turning blue when exposed^, (Arora), whitish to pale yellow, instantly turning blue when exposed, (Bessette), up to 3cm thick, buff to yellow, turning blue immediately on exposure; in stem yellow, dark red to almost black at base, turning blue when exposed, (Thiers), cream to yellow or rarely pinkish in cap, white to yellow in upper stem, and red to vinaceous in base; when cut, blueing instantly, (Trudell)
PORES  pale yellow becoming darker or duller yellow when old, turning blue when bruised^, (Arora), 1-3 per mm, angular, "yellow at first, becoming olive-yellow at maturity", instantly turning blue when bruised; tube layer 0.8-1.6cm thick, (Bessette), tube layer shallowly depressed when young, deeply depressed when old, (Thiers)
STEM  7-13(20)cm x 1-4cm, sometimes swollen in lower part (especially when young), firm, solid; usually yellow at top with bright pink to reddish areas in lower part, becoming dark red throughout when old; not reticulate but often longitudinally striate when old^, (Arora), 5-12cm x 2-4.5cm, nearly equal or widening or narrowing downward, solid; yellow near top and pinkish red to purple-red overall when old, quickly turning blue, then slowly staining grayish olive when bruised, mycelium whitish to pale yellow; dry, bald or sometimes longitudinally striate, lacking reticulation; partial veil and ring absent, (Bessette), yellow mycelium at base (Thiers)
ODOR  unpleasant or not distinctive (Bessette), often strong, unpleasant (Thiers)
TASTE  usually bitter^ (Arora), bitter (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  inedible because bitter (Bessette)
HABITAT  single to scattered or grouped primarily under conifers^ (Arora), single, scattered or in groups under conifers or sometimes oak, July to November, (Bessette), in Pacific Northwest in montane conifer forests; in California described from coastal conifer and mixed forests, (Trudell), summer, fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown^ (Arora, Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12.5-17.5 x 4-5 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth^, (Arora), spores 12-18 x 4-5 um, subfusoid to subcylindric, smooth, ochraceous, (Bessette), spores 12.5-17.6 x 4-5 um, subcylindric to subfusoid to narrowly subelliptic, smooth, ochraceous in KOH, dark ochraceous in Melzer's, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 26-30 x 7-13 um; hymenial cystidia scattered, 24-35 x 5-7 um, embedded in hymenium, fusoid to occasionally clavate or fusoid-ventricose, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle a trichodermium of interwoven hyphae, occasionally incrusted; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  means "red stem"^ (Both)
SIMILAR  Caloboletus calopus has a reticulated stem and paler cap, and does not usually have a completely dark red stem when old, (Thiers). Caloboletus marshii has a paler cap and lacks conspicuous red on the stem, and associates with oak, (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Boletus smithii.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus), Arora(1)* (as Boletus), Thiers(1) (as Boletus), Trudell(4)* (as Boletus), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus), Both(1) (as Boletus), AroraPocket(1)* (as Boletus), Desjardin(6)* (as Boletus), Siegel(2)*
25
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Chalciporus piperatoides  (A.H. Sm. & Thiers)  T.J. Baroni and Both^  Mycologia 83: 559-564. 1991;  Boletus piperatoides  A.H. Sm. and Thiers
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a buff to yellow brown or rusty brown cap, 2) brownish flesh that typically turns blue when cut, 3) irregular somewhat radial pores that are yellow to brown and stain blue to bluish black when bruised, 4) a stem that is cap-colored except at the base where it is bright yellow, and 5) peppery taste.^ RANGE ^Chalciporus piperatoides is found from NY to CA (Bessette), in the Pacific Northwest at least in WA and OR, (collections at the University of Washington, observed in OR by L. Norvell, pers. comm.). It appears on foray lists from BC where it is much less common than Chalciporus piperatus.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle dark rusty brown to blackish with application of KOH, flesh dull brown to purplish red or gray with application of KOH, (Bessette), flesh bluish gray with FeSO4, with flesh in KOH a yellow pigment dissolves into the mount, the reaction of the cap surface soon brownish, (Smith)
CAP  3-8cm, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat, sometimes with broad umbo, margin may be uplifted when old; "buff to yellow-brown, orangish-brown or rusty brown"; smooth or nearly smooth, dry, viscid when moist; margin with narrow band of sterile tissue^, (Bessette), 3-6cm, obtuse becoming flat or the margin becoming uplifted; tan to dull orange-cinnamon, margin close to cinnamon-buff; soft (like kid leather), subviscid, (Smith)
FLESH  "pale pinkish buff to dull pinkish brown or dull yellow-brown", typically turning blue when cut, at least above the tubes^, (Bessette), thick, pale pinkish buff, when cut slowly dull blue; in stem base lemon-yellow, (Smith)
PORES  up to 1.5mm wide, irregular, somewhat boletinoid [radially arranged and elongated], "dull yellow at first, becoming yellow-brown to orangish brown, dull cinnamon or brown, often with an olive tinge, staining blue to bluish black when bruised"; tube layer 0.5-1cm thick^, (Bessette), 2-3 per mm; yellow-brown, staining bluish; tube layer up to 1cm thick, decurrent, dull ochraceous, staining dingy inky blue when bruised, (Smith) 
STEM  3-8cm x 0.5-1.6cm, nearly equal, solid; colored as cap or paler, with bright yellow basal mycelium; "dry, fibrillose-punctate to fibrous-striate"; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 4-6cm x 0.4-0.6cm, solid; dingy yellowish brown, base coated with lemon-yellow mycelium; bald apart from mycelium at base, (Smith)
ODOR  
TASTE  slowly acrid [peppery]^ (Bessette), slowly peppery (not as hot as B. piperatus), (Smith)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups on ground under conifers or hardwoods^, (Bessette), fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark smoky olive when fresh, rusty cinnamon when dry^, (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-10 x 3-4 um, subfusiform [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, yellowish to pale brown^, (Bessette), spores 7-9(10) x 3-3.5 um, somewhat boat-shaped, smooth, in Melzer's fleeting amyloid fresh and as revived pale bister to dingy pale tan, in KOH pale clay color soon fading to bright yellow singly and more brownish in groups; basidia 4-spored, 23-28 x 5.5-7.5 um, clavate, colorless to yellowish in KOH; pleurocystidia 36-57 x 7-12 um, narrowly fusoid-ventricose to subcylindric, colorless to yellow in KOH and Melzer's reagent, cheilocystidia similar but smaller and content yellow to yellow-brown; cap cuticle of "interwoven hyphae 4-8 um wide, yellowish in KOH and with end-cells tubular to narrowly clavate, the walls showing a slight tendency to become roughened"; stem cuticle with fertile patches near top of stem with basidia and cystidia resembling those in hymenium; tube trama sections mounted in Melzer's and crushed become dark greenish to bluish green under microscope (but no localized amyloid reaction is present); clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'like [Chalciporus] piperatus'
SIMILAR  Chalciporus piperatus 1) does not turn blue, 2) its taste is more rapidly and strongly peppery, 3) its flesh is somewhat brighter in color, 4) the fresh spores lack a fleeting amyloid reaction, and 5) revived tube trama lacks a fleeting amyloid reaction, (Smith). C. piperatus has tubes not staining bluish and spore deposit brown rather than olive, (Trudell).
SOURCES  Smith(35), Bessette(3)*, Trudell(4)
26
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Chalciporus piperatus  (Bull.) Bataille^  Bolets p.19. 1908;  Boletus piperatus  Bull.
ENGLISH NAME(S)  peppery bolete, pepper bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) small yellowish brown to reddish brown cap, 2) yellowish flesh that does not turn blue, 3) angular pores that are cinnamon becoming reddish brown and not turning blue, 4) rather slender stem colored like cap except bright yellow at base, and 5) peppery taste.^ | Some evidence suggests it is a mycoparasite on mycelium of Amanita muscaria (Desjardin(6)). Chalciporus piperatus is common in the Pacific Northwest, especially in the northern part. |According to D. Miller, pers. comm. December 5, 2021, there are three European sequences from collections labeled Chalciporus piperatus. Two of these match Pacific Northwest sequences, meaning that, with Chalciporus piperatoides, there are three Chalciporus species in the Pacific Northwest. RANGE ^It is fairly common and widely distributed through North America, (Bessette). There are collections from WA, OR, AK and ID at the University of Washington and from BC at the University of British Columbia. Material was studied from CA (Thiers), and reported from AB (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), as well as Europe and Asia (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap stains dark reddish brown with application of KOH, and pale grayish green with FeSO4, flesh stains violet-gray with application of KOH and pale grayish green with FeSO4, (Bessette), with FeSO4 the line above the tubes is grayish, in KOH no reaction but on the cap surface staining dark red-brown, (Smith)
CAP  1.6-9cm, convex becoming nearly flat when old; "buff to yellow-brown, orange-brown or reddish brown"; bald or slightly fibrillose, dry or somewhat viscid, sometimes cracked when old^, (Bessette), 3-7cm, convex becoming flat-convex to flat or occasionally subumbonate [somewhat umbonate] when old; reddish brown to brown when young, when old fading to pale reddish brown; moist to dry, often subviscid when old or when wet, dull, bald to obscurely appressed-fibrillose, when old sometimes appearing obscurely rimose or slightly fibrillose-scaly, (Thiers), (1.5)2-5(9)cm, obtuse to convex, becoming flat to flat-convex to occasionally subumbonate or margin slightly turned up; clay color to yellow-brown or orange-cinnamon, often darker on disc to rusty cinnamon; dry becoming subviscid, mostly unpolished, bald to somewhat fibrillose-streaked or appressed-squamulose, always bald when old, at times areolate [cracked like dried mud], (Smith), dull when dry, somewhat lubricous when wet, (Breitenbach), 2-8cm but usually less than 5cm, (Arora), reddish brown to rust brown or vinaceous brown, often with a mix of yellowish brown, and sometimes becoming more ochraceous brown when old, (Trudell)
FLESH  "pale yellow or tinged reddish", becoming dingy purplish brown when old, not turning blue when cut or bruised; in stem lemon-yellow, not turning blue^, (Bessette), 0.5-1.5cm thick, yellow, changing to pale vinaceous to pink near the cap surface, "unchanging or darkly pigmented areas changing to grayish vinaceous when exposed", not turning blue; in stem yellow, unchanging or darkening slightly when exposed, (Thiers), up to 1cm thick, firm; pale yellow, when old often with slight rose tint or distinctly vinaceous above tubes, becoming dingy-vinaceous-buff when old; in stem lemon-yellow and unchanging, (Smith), in stem brownish buff in upper part and bright yellow in base (Trudell), in cap 0.5-1.5cm thick, "pale yellow with a vinaceous line below the cap cuticle, darkening to cinnamon-brown when bruised, not bluing" (Desjardin)
PORES  0.5-2mm wide, angular, sometimes radiating; "dull cinnamon, reddish cinnamon, or cinnamon-brown", becoming darker reddish brown when old, not turning blue when cut or bruised but sometimes staining brown; tube layer 0.3-1cm thick,^ (Bessette), 1-2mm, angular; red to reddish brown; tube layer 0.5-1cm thick, adnate to arcuate-decurrent when young, becoming depressed around stem when old, yellow to reddish yellow, unchanging or darkening slightly when bruised, (Thiers), 2 per mm average, angular, unequal, thin-walled; dull yellow when young, soon cinnamon and when old red to brick-red, not staining appreciably when injured (merely dark brown), tube layer 0.3-1cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent or faintly depressed, dingy ochraceous but slowly reddish when old, (Smith)
STEM  4-9.5cm x 0.6-1.2cm, equal or narrowing downward, solid; colored as cap or paler, base with bright yellow mycelium; partial veil and annulus absent,^ (Bessette), 2-4cm x 0.5-1cm at top, equal or narrowing downward, solid; reddish brown, usually more or less colored as cap, with copious bright yellow mycelium at base; dry, bald to slightly appressed-fibrillose, (Thiers), (2)4-10(12)cm x (0.3)0.4-1(1.5)cm, solid, reddish cinnamon from pruina, with yellow ground color, base bright yellow from mycelium, (Smith), more or less colored as cap or more yellowish in upper part (Courtecuisse)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
TASTE  distinctly hot and peppery^ (Bessette), very sharply and distinctly acrid [peppery] (Smith)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette), McIlvaine reports that peppery taste is lost in cooking and then edible, but Murrill warns that it is poisonous, (Thiers)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups on ground under conifers or hardwoods,^ (Bessette), summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown to cinnamon brown^ (Bessette), cinnamon brown (Thiers, Desjardin), dull cinnamon (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-12 x 4-5 um, narrowly fusiform, smooth, pale brown^, (Bessette), spores 8.5-12 x 3-4 um, subfusoid to subelliptic, colorless to pale ochraceous in KOH, rust brown in Melzer's reagent; basidia 4-spored, 24-29 x 8-10 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia abundant, conspicuous, 45-70 x 10-15 um, "fusoid-ventricose to subclavate to fusoid with obtuse apices", colorless; cap cuticle a tangled trichodermium staining dark brown in KOH and rust brown in Melzer's reagent; stem cuticle a layer of fertile basidia and caulocystidia similar to the hymenium, with occasional areas lacking these and appearing as a layer of interwoven hyphae; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores (8.5)9-12 x 4-5 um, narrowly fusiform, olivaceous-colorless to dingy ochraceous in KOH, rusty brown in Melzer's reagent; cap cuticle a tangled trichodermium of broad (10-17 um) hyphae with fusoid to elliptic or cylindric end-cells; tube trama inamyloid, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means "peppery"^ (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Chalciporus piperatoides has 1) tubes and pores that turn blue when cut or injured, 2) taste that is slowly only somewhat peppery, 3) cap flesh that is dull-colored, 4) fresh spores with a fleeting amyloid reaction, and 5) revived tube trama with a fleeting amyloid reaction, (Smith). C. piperatoides has tubes staining bluish and spore deposit olive rather than brown (Trudell). C. piperatoides "turns blue where injured (best seen by bruising the pores) and has a pinkish cinnamon cap context, without a vinaceous line below the cuticle, and dark smoky olive spore print."
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)* (as Boletus piperatus), Lincoff(2)* (as Boletus piperatus), McKnight(1)* (as Boletus), Trudell(4)*, Miller(14)*, Breitenbach(3)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Boletus), Ammirati(1)* (as Boletus), Sept(1)* (as Boletus), Grund(11) (as Boletus), Thiers(1) (as Boletus), Smith(35), Both(1), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
27
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Gastroboletus amyloideus  Thiers^  in Trappe & Thiers, Brittonia 21: 251. 1969
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Also included in Truffles category. Features include 1) a top-shaped to irregular fruitbody, 2) cap with a mixture of reddish and yellow coloring, the surface smooth to finely velvety, 3) highly convoluted tubes that are yellow to olive-yellow, often with reddish streaks, 4) yellowish to reddish pores, 5) a stem-columella usually present, 1-2cm long and outwardly visible to greatly reduced, 6) underground fruiting with trees in the family Pinaceae, and 7) microscopic characters including amyloid spores (in mass) and cap trama with septations differentially staining dextrinoid or amyloid. ^ |The description is from Siegel(3) except where noted. "Preliminary data shows that Gastroboletus amyloideus and G. vividus form a close-knit group with Boletus smithii", (Siegel(3), with Latin names italicized). RANGE ^The holotype and most records are from CA, but MyCoPortal lists an OR collection under the name of D. Luoma at the University of California Berkeley, and Siegel(3) mentions one site in OR (likely the same site).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  3-8cm across, "irregularly rounded to top-shaped", typically quite convoluted when old, cap "convex to broadly convex at first", soon irregularly flattened to centrally depressed, or folded upwards when old; yellow, golden yellow, ochraceous buff, to rust-brown, often with reddish patches and stains when old; "dry, dull, smooth to finely velvety"
FLESH  "whitish to yellowish", often with pinkish stains when old^, (Siegel(3)), cap flesh 1-2cm thick, "pale yellow, unchanging when exposed"; in stem yellow, unchanging when exposed, (Thiers)
PORES  interior "tubular, highly convoluted and interwoven"; yellow when young, "becoming olive-yellow", often with reddish streaks or stains 'bleeding' into spore mass; pores "small, rounded to highly irregular and convoluted", yellowish to olive-yellow when young, "soon with a reddish blush, or more extensively red" when old, "[n]ot staining, or erratically bruising bluish green"^, (Siegel), tubes 1-2.5cm long, "highly disoriented and appearing to radiate at various angles from the peridium", characteristically near "colonial buff" to "chamois" during all stages of development; pores small, less than 0.1cm across, (Thiers)
STEM  stem-columella 1-2cm long, 0.5-1.5cm thick, equal, narrowing downward or greatly reduced, "percurrent, occasionally branching"; yellowish at base, "with a rosy red band at apex"^, (Siegel), very reduced "and sometimes apparently lacking", 1-2cm x 0.5-1.5cm, solid; colored "chamois" to "old gold" to as pale as "warm buff" during all stages of development, with a red band at the apex,(Thiers)
ODOR  indistinct
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or scattered, "forming underground, typically remaining buried, occasionally emerging from duff when mature"; associated with Pinaceae, especially Abies magnifica (Red Fir) and Pinus contorta (Lodgepole Pine); "summer and fall"
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13.5-19 x 6-7 um, fusoid to cylindric, smooth, strongly amyloid in mass, thick-walled^; basidia 4-spored, 26-32 x 7-10 um, club-shaped, colorless; hymenial cystidia absent; peridium epicutis "made up of interwoven to tangled hyphae" 5-7 um wide, "pale ochraceous to dark yellow in KOH and Melzer's reagent"; clamp connections absent. (Siegel(3)), spores 13.5-18.8 x 6-7 um, "brown in KOH", strongly amyloid when seen in mass in Melzer's reagent; "peridial trama homogeneous to interwoven", up to 15 um wide, septations in Melzer's reagent "highly differentially stained, becoming conspicuous and giving either a dextrinoid or amyloid reaction"; tube trama colorless, more or less homogeneous, weakly divergent, at least when young, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  refers to the amyloid spores
SIMILAR  Gastroboletus vividus "is very similar, and macroscopic differences are slight. Typically it has more vivid colors, slightly less deformed fruit bodies, with a more defined stipe, and it lacks the amyloid spores." (Siegel(3)). Gastroboletus ruber "also has a rounded, top-shaped or lobed fruit body, but has a dark rose to reddish brown, smooth, thin peridium which usually disappears, exposing the reddish orange to red, convoluted pores. It typically stains bluish on all parts and has inamyloid spores" which are smaller, (Siegel(3)).
SOURCES  Siegel(3)*, Thiers(7) (colors individually in double brackets from Ridgway(1))
28
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Gastroboletus ruber  (Zeller) Cazares and Trappe^  Mycotaxon 42: 339-345. 1991;  Truncocolumella rubra  Zeller
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Also listed in Truffles etc. category. Features include 1) nearly spherical to top-shaped or lobed fruitbody lacking a distinct cap, 2) rose to reddish brown covering that is smooth and thin, usually disappearing over the tube mouths which are tinged reddish orange to red, 3) tubes pale yellow to dark olive, and blue when bruised or exposed, not vertical, divided into narrow maze-like cavities, 4) short pale yellow stem-columella that branches into the interior of the spore mass and that turns blue when bruised or exposed, 5) development under the soil surface associated with mountain conifers, and 6) large spores.^ | Gastroboletus ruber is the current name in the online Species Fungorum, accessed April 1, 2018, but in MycoBank, accessed the same day, the current name is Truncocolumella rubra. The species will likely be recombined into a bolete genus such as Neoboletus. Gastroboletus ruber is common among false truffles in the Pacific Northwest (Trappe(13)). RANGE ^Gastroboletus ruber is found in WA, OR, and CA, (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  2-4cm x 2-5.5cm, nearly spherical to top-shaped or lobed, peridium [outer layer] rose to brown-red or red-brown and persistent at top of stem, dingy pale yellow to dark red-brown and usually disappearing where covering tube mouths but sometimes partially persisting and then becoming yellow-brown to cinnamon and depressed in the tube mouths to give a reticulate appearance^, (Cazares), 2-5cm broad, 2-4cm high, broadly pear-shaped to nearly spherical; peridium (outer layer) yellowish at first, becoming reddish where exposed, aniline yellow where covered by soil, surface thin and almost entirely disappearing by maturity, (Smith), 2-3.5cm broad, 2.5-3cm high, broadly pear-shaped, peridium thin, almost entirely disappearing by maturity, reddish, (Zeller)
FLESH  in stem yellowish white, turning blue when bruised or exposed^, (Zeller), in stem-columella pale yellow, colored as surface, turning instantly blue when cut, (Cazares)
PORES  initially of separable tubes 0.5-1.0 mm in diameter and divided into maze-like locules +/- 0.2 mm wide, on expansion, tubular organization disrupted but locules still radiate and are up to 0.5(0.8)mm wide; pale yellow when young, dark olive when mature, tube mouths tinged red-orange to red when mature, turning blue where bruised or cut^, (Cazares), cavities relatively large, maze-like; "dingy pale yellow, changing to bluish on bruising and exposure, drying raw umber to rusty brown", (Smith), cavities in spore mass relatively large, maze-like, spore mass sordid light yellow, turning blue on bruising or exposure, (Zeller), pores up to 1mm wide, angular to irregular, (Bessette)
STEM  up to 1.5cm broad at top when percurrent, columnar to dendroid, percurrent or not, with many branches reaching or nearly reaching the peridium, projecting as much as 1cm below the glebal base; pale yellow, turning blue instantly when cut^, (Cazares), 0.7-1.5cm thick, "almost percurrent at times and also with narrow plate-like branches radiating laterally and terminally, extended below as a sterile base", "yellowish, changing to blue when bruised or exposed, drying yellowish", (Smith), columella stout, 0.7-1.2cm broad, "almost percurrent, with narrow branches radiating laterally and terminally", "extended below as a sterile base", (Zeller), 1-2cm x 1-2cm, tapered downward; colored like cap; dry, (Bessette)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Cazares)
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  fruitbodies develop under the soil surface associated with the roots of assorted Pinaceae species above 1,350 m in elevation, particularly Abies amabilis, A. procera, A. magnifica var. shastensis, Pinus monticola, or Tsuga mertensiana, August through September^, (Castellano), single to gregarious or cespitose, underground or emergent, Cascade Mountains at elevations 1200-1800m, (Cazares), emergent from heavy duff under conifers, especially hemlock, during late summer in the Cascade Mountains of Washington, (Smith), type emergent from heavy duff under hemlock, (Zeller), summer, fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  not obtainable^ (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8)9-15(20) x 4-6 um, subfusiform [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, inamyloid, pale green to olive in KOH, walls up to 0.5 um thick^; basidia 2-spored to 4-spored, 26-40 x 7-11 um, cylindric to clavate, colorless, thin-walled; cystidia scattered, 25-50 x 4-14 um, fusoid-ventricose, colorless to pale olive in KOH, thin-walled, lacking incrustations; peridial epicutis "initially differentiated as a palisade of cylindric to clavate dermatocystidia 15-30(70) x 3-10 um", colorless to pale yellow in KOH, becoming a disrupted turf over the gleba but remaining a palisade over percurrent columellar apices; clamp connections absent, (Cazares), spores (10)11-14(15) x 4-5.5(6) um, narrowly oval to nearly oblong, smooth, weakly pseudoamyloid, yellowish in KOH, wall thickened up to 0.5 um; basidia 4-spored, 26-33 x 9-11 um, clavate; cystidia scattered, 38-50 x 9-14 um, fusoid-ventricose, tapered gradually to acute apex, colorless to yellow in KOH, a few with yellow inclusions in KOH, thin-walled, not incrusted; epicutis "a palisade of thin-walled dermatocystidia over the youngest peridia"; clamp connections absent, (Smith), spores 10-12.5 x 4.5-5.5 um, oblong-elliptic, ochraceous brown, (Zeller)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'red'
SIMILAR  Gastroboletus turbinatus is similar but has a distinct cap and wider spores, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Cazares(4), Smith(29) (as Truncocolumella rubra), Castellano(1)*, Bessette(3)*, Arora(1) (as Truncocolumella rubra), Zeller(7) (as Truncocolumella rubra), Trappe(13)
29
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Gastroboletus turbinatus  (Snell) A.H. Sm. and Singer^  Brittonia 11: 208-210. 1959
ENGLISH NAME(S)  gastroid bolete, bogus bolete
NOTES  Also listed in Truffles etc. category. Features include 1) an irregular to top-shaped cap that is yellowish brown to reddish brown sometimes with yellowish or reddish tinges, 2) yellow flesh that turns blue when exposed, 3) yellowish tubes that are irregular and not vertically oriented, 4) angular pores that are yellow or tinged orange and turn blue when bruised, 5) a short stem that is yellow with reddish tinges and turns blue when bruised, and 6) growth under conifers, often partly buried.^ |The taxon will likely be recombined as one or more species in a bolete genus. |Var. flammeus, known from Idaho, grows on the ground under fir and has a pale golden cap with red blotches, bright red pores when young, and shorter spores 11-14 x 7-9 um, (Bessette). Var. flammeus may occur elsewhere in the Pacific Northwest and other varieties are not well documented. According to D. Miller, pers. comm. there may be an unnamed variety in the Pacific Northwest. |Among false truffles in the Pacific Northwest, G. turbinatus is common, (Trappe(13)). RANGE ^Gastroboletus turbinatus is found in WA, OR, and ID, and is apparently widely distributed in the western US and also found in MO, (Smith). It is also found in CA (Castellano). There are BC collections at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  2-5(8)cm across, convex to slightly depressed to irregular; usually brown to reddish brown to bright yellow with red or brown spots and stains; "dry, minutely velvety, often pitted or wrinkled"^, (Arora), 2-5(8)cm across, convex becoming flat or slightly depressed; bister to mummy-brown, golden-yellow or bay-red, or with a reddish to orange-salmon tinge at least along marginal area; dry, velvety, when old subtomentose [somewhat tomentose], (Smith)
FLESH  soft; yellow, typically bruising blue quickly; in stem base often reddish^, (Arora), flesh "yellow in the peridium, often partly pinkish in the stipe-columella, tending to stain blue when injured and later becoming red to brownish in these areas, especially on drying", (Smith)
PORES  "pinkish to reddish, orange, or yellow", typically turning blue quickly when bruised; tubes irregular and sinuous or oriented at various angles other than vertical, greenish yellow to yellow^, (Arora), round at first and about 0.5mm across, when old with large angular depressions reaching 1 mm across; tube chambers reaching 1-3cm or more in length but diminishing in length in both directions from the place where they are longest, "strongly projecting beyond the peridium or remaining covered by its extended thin portion, either strongly depressed or nearly free from the apex of the columella, more rarely broadly attached to the columella"; interior of gleba yellow and quickly turning blue on exposure, pores in some specimens becoming reddish at mouths when mature or when old, (Smith), 1-2 per mm, angular, "covered by a thin membrane at first", surface irregular and uneven; yellow, sometimes tinted orange, quickly turning blue when bruised; "tubes 1-3cm long, irregular and not vertically arranged", depressed near stem, (Bessette)
STEM  1-4(7)cm x 1-2.5cm, equal or narrowing at base, often protruding only a short distance below tubes, solid; "yellow or with reddish streaks or granules or colored like the cap", sometimes reddish when old and often reddish at base; dry^, (Arora), 1-2(7)cm x 0.8-2cm, equal or narrowing downward, often not projecting much below gleba, solid; unpolished in upper part, "yellow or more orange-yellow to reddish toward the base, turning blue when bruised, sometimes finally becoming reddish"; frequently finely rivulose [with river-like lines] "because of the cracking of a brownish to reddish layer, the layer finally breaking up into minute points, at times brown-furfuraceous in a narrow zone", stem finally becoming bald; no veil, (Smith)
ODOR  slight and insignificant^ (Smith)
TASTE  slight and insignificant^ (Smith)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Arora)
HABITAT  single to scattered or gregarious "on ground in woods or at their edges, often partially buried"^, (Arora), on humus under conifers, often Abies spp. (fir), along mountain paths and roadsides, July through September, (Smith), summer, fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  not obtainable^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (9.5)13.5-18 x 6.5-9.5 um, elliptic to spindle-shaped, smooth, brown or golden^, (Arora), spores (9.5)13.5-18(20) x (5.5)6.5-9.5 um, elliptic to oblong or slightly oval, honey-colored, often with a fulvous tinge, "walls simple at first, later thickening and becoming 3-layered", "apex obtuse to acute and the wall there either continuous or showing a slight pore"; basidia mostly 4-spored but sometimes with 1, 2 or 3 spores, 35-38 x 9-14 um, "rather voluminous, vesiculose-pedicellate to clavate", colorless or yellow in KOH, basidioles scattered, variable in size or shape, about 33 x 9 um, mostly somewhat clavate, colorless; "pseudoparaphyses similar in size and shape to the basidioles but without protoplasmic content and hence not likely to produce spores"; cystidia rare but present in interior as well as pores, 35-60 x 9.5-17 um, ventricose-mucronate to more often ventricose in middle and ampullaceous-pedicellate, often with a long thin neck, colorless, later either colorless or golden yellow to brownish, apex usually obtuse; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means "shaped like a spinning top, obconical, turbinate", (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Gastroboletus ruber lacks a distinct cap and has narrower spores.
SOURCES  Smith(29), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Miller(14)*, Castellano(2)*, Trudell(4)*, Thiers(7), Both(1), Trappe(13), Marrone(1)*
30
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Gastroboletus vividus  Trappe & Castellano^  Mycotaxon 75: 158. 2000
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Also listed in Truffles etc. category. Features include 1) a bright yellow and red cap, 2) pale yellow flesh that stains slowly red where exposed, 3) yellow pores that turn olive and then red-orange to red, 4) tubes that are olive and often contorted, 5) abruptly bulbous yellow stem that is red-furfuraceous at top, 6) growth underground or partially underground under conifers, and 7) microscopic characters including inamyloid spores on (2-)4-spored basidia.^ | The species will likely be recombined into a bolete genus. The description derived from Trappe(2) except where specified. It is infrequent among false truffles in the Pacific Northwest (Trappe(13)). RANGE ^Gastroboletus vividus is found from southern OR Cascade Mountains to northern CA, (Trappe(13)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^Melzer's reagent nonreactive on fresh or dry flesh
CAP  3-5 x 3.5-6.5(8)cm, like a bolete but with cap margins strongly turned up when mature; cap surface "moderate yellow with red areas or red blushed overall"; dry, felty
FLESH  "pale yellow, very slowly staining pale red where exposed", with narrow, olive to red zones at tube attachment and immediately beneath cap surface; in stem red at top, pale yellow in lower part, unchanging when exposed
PORES  0.5-2.0mm, round to elliptic; brilliant yellow at first but soon becoming olive and by maturity red-orange to dark red, not blueing where bruised; tube layer 1-2cm thick, tubes "aligned from slightly below horizontal to nearly vertically upward, often contorted", adnate-seceding, olive
STEM  2-3cm x 1-3cm, abruptly bulbous below tube layer; brilliant yellow to sordid yellow; red-furfuraceous at top
ODOR  not distinctive
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  growing underground or partially underground under mature conifers (Abies concolor, A. magnifica var. shastensis, Pinus contorta and Tsuga mertensiana), July to September, (Trappe(2)), above 1650m elevation (Castellano), summer, fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores (11)13-18(22) x 6-7(8) um, fusoid or occasionally oboval, smooth, inamyloid^ ("in Melzer's reagent pale yellow singly and brown-yellow in mass"), "in KOH golden yellow singly and bright brown-yellow in mass"; basidia (2-)4-spored, 30-45 x 9-11 um, clavate; cystidia absent; cap cuticle a loose tangle of hyphae, thin-walled hyphae 4-8 um wide at septa, the cells mostly slightly inflated; clamp connections absent
NAME ORIGIN  means "brightly colored" (Trappe(2))
SIMILAR  Gastroboletus amyloideus Thiers of California is somewhat less brightly colored and has amyloid spores, (Trappe(2)).
SOURCES  Trappe(2), Castellano(1)*, Trappe(13)
31
FAMILY  Gyroporaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Gyroporus borealis  Davoodian, O. Asher, Sturgeon, Ammirati & Delaney^  in Davoodian, Hosaka, Raspe, Asher, Franck, De Kesel, Delaney, Ammirati, Nagasawa, Buyck & Halling, Phytotaxa 434: 214. 2020
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) an orange-brown to cinnamon brown or reddish brown cap that is dry and fine-matted to smooth-subvelvety or patchily furfuraceous, 2) white unchanging flesh, 3) pale yellow to dirty yellow tubes that are adnexed to nearly adnate, [the pore surface probably whitish to yellowish and illustrated with circular pores], 4) a slightly curved, bumpy stem that is colored similarly to the cap, and pithy/chambered inside, 5) growth near hardwoods or hemlock, and 6) microscopic characters including clamp connections.^ |Gyroporus borealis was differentiated from the other Gyroporus species in North America in 2020 by Davoodian(1), using rpb2 sequencing and morphological considerations. Prior to that G. borealis went under the European name Gyroporus castaneus. Other Gyroporus species in North America include Gyroporus smithii, Gyroporus roseialbus, and Gyroporus subalbellus. but none of these have been documented for the Pacific Northwest. See Gyroporus castaneus group for further information. |The description is derived from Davoodian(1). RANGE ^Collections were examined from WA, VT, and OH, (Davoodian(1)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  3.5-6.5cm, convex to flat to slightly concave; "orange-brown, cinnamon brown to sometimes reddish (especially in dried condition)"; "very fine matted to smooth-subvelvety to patchily furfuraceous"
FLESH  "white, unchanging"
PORES  tubes "adnexed to subadnate, pale yellow to dirty yellow, occasionally with an orangish hue when dried"
STEM  4-5cm x 1-1.6cm, "slightly curved, bumpy, subconcolorous to concolorous with pileus, pale reddish-brown to concolorous with pileus in dried condition, pubescent, pithy/chambered"
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  to be avoided in general as poisonous Gyroporus is known (Davoodian(1))
HABITAT  "with native vegetation in Vermont (Betula, Tsuga; Acer in vicinity) and Ohio (Quercus, Fagus, Tsuga; mixed hardwoods in vicinity) [Latin italicized]", and in Washington occurs presumably by way of planted ectomycorrhizal landscape trees, for example birch, oak, pine etc.
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8.0)8.8-11(12) x 4.8-5.6(6.4) um, elliptic, sometimes subreniform to oval, smooth, yellow-hyaline^; basidia 23.2-30.4 x 11.2-13.6 um, clavate, with pronounced sterigmata; basidioles 16.824 x 8-12 um, subclavate; cheilocystidia 31.2-36.8 x 6.4-8 um, "ventricose to ventricose-rostrate", pleurocystidia "none found, apparently absent or rare"; cap cuticle "a trichodermium of erect, tangled elements" (8-10 um broad) with rounded, tapered, or cystidioid end cells (10-14 um broad), elements submelleous in aggregate; clamp connections present in cap cuticle
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Gyroporus smithii displays less brown and red tones in the cap and stem surfaces. It is encountered east of the Great Plains, but west and south of the Appalachian Mountains, and was examined Davoodian(1) from Michigan and Florida.
SOURCES  Davoodian(1)*
32
FAMILY  Gyroporaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Gyroporus castaneus  (Fr.) Quel.  group^  Enchir. Fung. p.161. 1886;  Boletus castaneus  Fr.
ENGLISH NAME(S)  chestnut bolete
NOTES  The only member of this group known to occur in the Pacific Northwest is Gyroporus borealis (see separate entry). The group entry, with descriptions by North American authors, is retained for the present to describe some Gyroporus details not found in the Gyroporus borealis description such as pore surface details and spore deposit. |Features include 1) a red-brown to yellow brown cap that is dry and velvety to smooth, 2) white unchanging flesh that is firm and brittle, 3) white to pale yellow pores and tubes neither of which turn blue, 4) a hollow stem colored like cap or slightly paler, 5) growth under hardwoods, 6) yellow spore deposit, and 7) microscopic characters including clamp connections.^ |The group consists of Gyroporus species know to occur in North America: Gyroporus borealis (known from VA, OH, and WA), Gyroporus smithii (from east of the Great Plains but west and south of the Appalachians, including MI and FL), Gyroporus roseialbus (known from Florida), and Gyroporus subalbellus (known from Mississippi). Gyroporus castaneus itself is known from Europe. RANGE ^Gyroporus castaneus group has been found in CA, WA, and OR, (Thiers), from eastern Canada south to FL, west to CA, and Mexico, (Bessette), NS (Grund), WA, OH, VI, MI and FL, (Davoodian), and Europe. Collections from BC are deposited at the Pacific Forestry Centre.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle stains yellow then bleaches to white with application of KOH and is negative with FeSO4, flesh stains very pale brownish or is negative with application of KOH or FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  2.5-7(10)cm, convex to flat or shallowly depressed; "chestnut-brown to brown, cinnamon-brown, orange-brown, or rusty-tawny"; "dry, minutely hairy to smooth, sometimes with a delicate whitish bloom when young"^, (Arora), 3-10cm, rounded to broadly convex becoming nearly flat, sometimes slightly depressed, margin often split and flaring when old; chestnut to yellow-brown or orange-brown; dry, velvety-tomentose to nearly bald, (Bessette), 3-7cm, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly convex to flat-convex, flat, or depressed; brown to tan to pinkish brown; dry, bald to finely tomentose to pulverulent [powdery], often cracked or areolate-cracked [cracked like dried mud] when old; margin becoming cracked or split, (Thiers), sometimes appearing granulose-reticulate when old, (Smith)
FLESH  thick, firm; white, not turning blue when bruised^, (Arora), brittle; white, not staining blue, (Bessette), thick; white, unchanging when exposed, (Thiers)
PORES  white, becoming pale yellow when old, not turning blue; tubes the same color^, (Arora), 1-3 per mm, round; whitish to buff or yellowish, never pinkish or colored like the flesh; tube layer 0.5-0.8cm thick, (Bessette), 1-2 per mm, angular, radially elongate near top of stem, white becoming yellow at maturity, unchanging or darkening slightly when bruised; tube layer 0.3-0.5cm thick, shallow to deeply and broadly depressed around stem, colored as pores, (Thiers), 1-2 per mm, round to angular; tubes free and deeply sunken around stem, (Phillips), tubes free and always shorter towards stem (Lincoff(1)), tubes free or deeply depressed around stem, rarely adnate or subdecurrent, whitish becoming yellowish, unchanging when bruised or merely changing to brownish, pores not staining when bruised, (Smith)
STEM  3-9cm x 0.5-1(3)cm, more or less equal, sometimes wider in lower part, hollow or partially hollow at least when mature; "brown to tawny (colored more or less like cap or slightly paler)"; dry, uneven^, (Arora), 3-9cm x 0.6-1.6cm, equal or often swollen in middle or lower part, often narrowed at top and base, "brittle, stuffed with a soft pith, developing several cavities" or becoming hollow when old; colored like cap or slightly paler toward top; surface uneven, not reticulate; partial veil and annulus absent, (Bessette), 2-4 x 0.5-1.5cm, equal or widening downward from top, hollow in lower part; tan to brown to pinkish brown, similar to cap; dry, unpolished, bald to tomentose to velvety, (Thiers)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
TASTE  not distinctive (Bessette), hazelnut (Lincoff(1)), mild, slightly acidic (Miller)
EDIBILITY  to be avoided in general as poisonous Gyroporus is known (Davoodian(1))
HABITAT  single or in groups under hardwoods^, (Arora), single, scattered, or in groups under mixed conifers and hardwoods, (Bessette), summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  pale yellow to yellow^, (Arora), pale yellow to buff (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-12 x 4.5-6 um, elliptic-oblong, smooth^, (Arora), spores 8-13 x 5-6 um, elliptic to oval, smooth, colorless, (Bessette), spores 10-12.5(14) x 5-6 um, elliptic, smooth, ochraceous in Melzer's reagent, colorless to pale yellow in KOH, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 30-35 x 8-14 um, clavate, colorless to pale yellow in KOH; hymenial cystidia abundant, 30-45 x 7-11 um, fusoid to obscurely fusoid-ventricose, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle a layer of cystidioid cells forming a tangled trichodermium; stem cuticle similar to cap cuticle; clamp connections present, (Thiers), spores lacking germ pore; clamp connections present, but many pseudoclamps also present, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  from Byzantine Greek "chestnut" (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Smith(35), Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Breitenbach(3)*, Grund(11), Buczacki(1)*, Davoodian(1)*
33
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Hemileccinum subglabripes  (Peck) Halling^  in Halling, Fechner, Nuhn, Osmundson, Soytong, Arora, Binder & Hibbett, Aust. Syst. Bot. 28: 19 (2015);  Boletus subglabripes  Peck  Bull. N.Y. State Museum 2(8): 112. 1889;  Leccinum subglabripes  (Peck) Singer
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry smooth cap that is ochraceous to cinnamon to reddish brown, 2) whitish to pale yellow flesh that only rarely turns slightly bluish, 3) small round yellow pores that do not change when injured, 4) a yellowish stem that has tiny yellow scales but no reticulum and may have reddish or reddish brown tinges at the base, 5) growth under birch or other hardwoods, and 6) microscopic characters.^ | Molecular data support segregation from Boletus as Hemileccinum subglabripes Halling. (Halling(6)). RANGE ^Bessette et al. give the distribution as eastern Canada to FL, west to MN and TX, but it has also been reported from WA, ID, (H. Thiers 1986, pers. comm. to L. Norvell), and Smith(4) cite it as very rare in the Pacific Northwest. The eastern distribution specifically includes NS (Grund). There is a 2006 BC collection by M. Kranabetter at the University of British Columbia (as Boletus subglabripes).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains grayish olive-green with application of FeSO4 (Bessette)
CAP  4.5-10cm, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old, sometimes broadly umbonate; "chestnut, ocher, cinnamon, or reddish brown"; "smooth to slightly wrinkled"^, (Bessette), 4.5-10cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat-convex or broadly umbonate; yellow to ochraceous to clay color or more rarely dull cinnamon; dry to moist, bald, dull, often pitted or somewhat rugose [wrinkled], (Smith(35)), "light brown to rich cinnamon, yellow-brown, or reddish brown"; "dry, glabrous to slightly viscid when wet", (Phillips)
FLESH  pale yellow to whitish, rarely turning blue slightly when cut or bruised^, (Bessette), thick, up to 2cm, firm; whitish to pale yellow, occasionally irregular areas changing to olive-buff or greenish yellow when old where damaged, typically not changing when injured but rarely slightly bluish; in stem pale bright yellow except whitish in base, cortex sometimes staining reddish when old, (Smith(35))
PORES  2 per mm, round, yellow when fresh, duller or slightly greenish yellow when old; tube layer 0.5-1.6cm thick^, (Bessette), about 2 per mm, round, not stuffed when young; yellow, unchanging when injured; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, deeply and broadly depressed around stem, yellow, (Smith(35)) 
STEM  5-10cm x 1-2cm, nearly equal, solid; yellowish with occasional reddish or reddish brown tinges on lower part; "minutely scurfy with a thin coating of tiny yellow scales, dots, or points, not reticulate; partial veil and annulus absent"^, (Bessette), 5-10cm x 1-2cm, equal to ventricose, narrowing slightly toward top or base, solid; pale to bright yellow, occasionally with reddish stains at base; dry, furfuraceous to scabrous or fibrillose, never reticulate, (Smith(35))
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
TASTE  mild to slightly acidic^ (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered on ground under hardwoods, especially birch, occasionally under conifers^, (Bessette)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown^ (Bessette), olive to olive-ochraceous brown (Smith(35))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-17 x 3-5 um, narrowly fusoid [spindle-shaped], smooth, pale brown^, (Bessette), spores 11-14 x 3-5 um, narrowly fusoid, smooth, pale greenish yellow revived in KOH, yellowish in Melzer's, wall less than 0.2 um thick with no apical pore seen; basidia 4-spored, 18-26 x 8-10 um, clavate, colorless to yellowish in KOH; pleurocystidia rare to scattered, 32-54 x 8-15 um, fusoid-ventricose, smooth, thin-walled, apex acute, contents colorless to yellow revived in KOH, cheilocystidia numerous, 20-32 x 8-12 um, fusoid to fusoid-ventricose, colorless to yellow in KOH; cap cuticle "a compact trichodermium the elements of which have the distal 2-5 cells inflated to sphaerocyst proportions and some so closely packed together as to produce a cellular layer, the cells (6)10-24 um in diameter, more or less isodiametric and with yellow walls as revived in KOH or in Melzer's"; stem cuticle has hymenium present in patches, caulocystidia 35-60 x 10-30 um, soon colorless in KOH mounts, smooth, thin-walled, (Smith(35)), spores (11)12-14(17) x 3-3.5(5) um, (Phillips)
NAME ORIGIN  means "with nearly smooth stem"^ (Both)
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus subglabripes), Smith(35) (as Boletus subglabripes), Smith(4) (as Boletus subglabripes), Both(1) (as Boletus subglabripes), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus subglabripes), Grund(11) (as Boletus subglabripes), Halling(6)
34
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Hortiboletus coccyginus  (Theirs) C.F. Schwarz, N. Siegel & J.L. Frank^  in Frank, Siegel, Schwarz, Araki & Vellinga, Fungal Systematics and Evolution 6: 284. 2020;  Boletus coccyginus  Thiers  California Mushrooms pp. 72-73. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry, rose-colored, velvety cap, 2) flesh that usually does not stain blue, 3) small pores that do not usually turn blue when bruised, 4) a variably shaped stem that is pinkish-red to pale reddish brown over yellow, often longitudinally streaked, and sometimes punctate at the top, and 5) microscopic characters including variable spores and no highly differentiated cystidia.^ | It is a rare species (Bessette). RANGE ^Distribution is from northern WA south into central CA along the coast and east into the Sierra Nevada; collections were examined from WA, OR, and CA, (Frank). It is rare in the Pacific Northwest and CA (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^KOH: "dingy olive-green flash, quickly becoming golden orange on pileus, dingy orange-brown on tubes, yellowish on stipe, no reaction on context"
CAP  2-6(8)cm across, "rounded-convex to broadly convex when young", to nearly flat or irregular or wavy when old; "rosy red, red, pinkish red to pinkish"; "dry to moist, pubescent when young, becoming smooth"^, (Frank), 2-4cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat to "irregularly lobed, incised or convoluted at maturity", margin downcurved; purple red, sometimes slightly paler, unchanging or becoming slightly paler when old; dry to moist, typically finely velvety to red-pubescent when young, usually bald when old, plush-like in appearance, sometimes finely areolate [finely cracked like dried mud] near margin, (Thiers)
FLESH  "firm, moderately thick to thin" in cap, pale yellow or yellowish brown in stem base, "not staining when cut"^, (Frank), 0.5-1cm thick, yellow, "usually unchanging, but sometimes slowly and erratically changing to blue", in stem yellow, unchanging with exposure, (Thiers)
PORES  "small and irregular at first", expanding when old; "dull yellow at first, to yellow or greenish yellow", becoming olive yellow when old, "not staining blue on younger specimens, occasionally bruising bluish green" when old; tube layer sunken around stem "and rather short at margin"^, (Frank), 1-3 per mm, angular, adnate to depressed, seceding; bright yellow, unchanging when bruised; tube layer 0.2-0.5cm thick, dull yellow, unchanging when exposed, (Thiers)
STEM  1.5-7cm x 0.5-2(3)cm, "equal, peg-like", narrowing toward base to irregular; "pinkish red to pale reddish brown over yellow"; "often streaked with longitudinal striations to appressed-fibrillose, finely punctate at apex, to smooth"^, (Frank), 1.5-4.5 x 0.5-1cm, equal or narrowing downward, stuffed to solid; red, yellowish at base; dry, appressed-fibrillose becoming bald, smooth or with longitudinal striations, not reticulate [not netted], light yellow mycelium at base, (Thiers)
ODOR  indistinct^ (Frank), not distinctive (Thiers)
TASTE  mild^, (Frank, Thiers)
EDIBILITY  undetermined (Thiers)
HABITAT  single or in small clusters, in the Pacific Northwest often in stands of Populus trichocarpa (Black Cottonwood), on the California coast under Notholithocarpus densiflorus (Tanoak), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), Alnus rubra (Red Alder), and Quercus agrifolia (California Live Oak), in the Sierra Nevada in mixed forest with Abies concolor (White Fir), A. magnifica (California Red Fir), Pinus contorta (Lodgepole Pine), and Populus tremuloides (Quaking Aspen); late summer and fall^, (Frank), gregarious to subcespitose [almost tufted] under conifers, (Thiers)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown^ (Frank, Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-17.5 x 5-7 um, cylindric, oval to elliptic in face view, "often somewhat variable in shape and size", smooth, moderately thick-walled, "ocher in KOH"^; basidia 1-spored to 4-spored, 23-28 x 7-10 um, "narrowly clavate", colorless; hymenial cystidia absent; cap cuticle a tangled trichoderm of hyphae 5-7 um wide, "staining dark yellow in KOH"; clamp connections absent, (Frank), spores 11.2-17.6 x 5.3-7 um, cylindric, to oval to elliptic, very variable in size and shape, smooth, often dextrinoid, ochraceous in KOH, moderately thick-walled; basidia apparently 1-spored, 2-spored, 3-spored and 4-spored, 23-28 x 7-10 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia "not apparent, but occasionally basidioid cells staining dark brown in Melzer's scattered in hymenium"; cap cuticle a tangled trichodermium of more or less repent hyphae 5-7 um wide, walls asperulate to faintly incrusted; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  means "becoming rose red (when dried)"^, (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Xerocomellus species lack the rosy red to pink cap, may have cracking in the cap (not typical for H. coccyginus), and have flesh that may turn blue, (Frank).
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus), Both(1) (as Boletus), Siegel(2)* (as "Boletus" coccyginus), Frank(9)
35
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Hortiboletus 'rubellus'  (Krombh.) Simonini, Vizzini & Gelardi^  in Vizzini, Index Fungorum 244: 1 2015;  Boletus rubellus  Krombh.  Naturgetr. Abbild. Beschr. Schwamme (Prague) 5: 4. 1836;  Xerocomus rubellus  (Krombh.) Quel.;  Xerocomellus rubellus  (Krombh.) Sutara
ENGLISH NAME(S)  ruby bolete
NOTES  Features include a red, dry, velvety cap that often becomes finely cracked, yellow flesh that turns slowly and slightly blue when cut, small, yellow pores then turn somewhat blue when bruised, more or less cylindric stem that is yellow at the top and reddish in the lower part, and growth near hardwoods.^ |According to D. Miller, pers. comm., the Pacific Northwest material is not the same as European material and will need a new name. RANGE ^Hortiboletus rubellus is found in North America, Europe, North Africa, and Asia, (Breitenbach), and the United Kingdom (Bon). The range in North America is given by Bessette(3) as "eastern North America west to Minnesota", but Trudell(4) say that several Pacific Northwest collections fit H. rubellus well. Trudell(4) say, "There is a good chance that boletes in this group have been introduced into our area. They often occur during summer in grassy areas, mossy lawns, or along the edges of trails, always near trees such as oaks, cottonwood, willow, and basswood or linden." Hortiboletus rubellus [or something close] has been collected from Seattle, WA (S. Trudell, pers. comm.). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains dull orange with KOH, and olive-green with FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  2-8cm across, convex, becoming nearly flat when old, margin even; dark red when young, fading to brick-red when old; dry, velvety-subtomentose, often becoming finely rimose [cracked]^ when mature, (Bessette(3)), 3-5cm across, hemispheric - bell-shaped when young, later convex to flat, somewhat undulating when old; "strikingly blood-red when young, later fading and brown-red"; dry, finely tomentose, (Breitenbach), 3-8cm across, broadly convex; brick-red; dry, velvety, finally areolate [cracked like dried mud], (Smith), scarlet red when young, becoming dull olivaceous red when old, margin often yellowish; dry and velvety, finally bald, and often areolate [cracked like dried mud], (Phillips), 5-7cm across, scarlet to vinaceous red; smooth, (Bon)
FLESH  "bright yellow, slowly staining bluish green on exposure"; in stem "yellow, slowly staining bluish green, reddish orange in the base"^, (Bessette(3)), thick, soft; yellowish, blueing slightly when cut, (Breitenbach), pale, only slowly tinged blue (Bon)
PORES  1 to 2 per mm, angular, thick-walled, "yellow, staining bluish green when bruised"; tube layer 0.6-1cm deep, typically depressed when mature^, (Bessette(3)), lemon yellow to gold-yellow when young, "later with an olive tint, bluing somewhat when touched"; tubes 0.5-1cm deep, greenish yellow, the layer "somewhat notched and sometimes decurrent as thin ridges", (Breitenbach), small; pale yellow, (Bon)
STEM  3-8cm x 0.5-1.3cm, narrowing downward or nearly equal, often with a narrowed base; yellow at top, "punctate with dull reddish orange dots and points" from the base to the top, "darkening to brown where handled"^, (Bessette(3)), 4-10cm x 0.7-1.5(2)cm, cylindric to fusiform-clavate; light yellow at top, increasingly red to brown-red downward, base and mycelium chrome yellow, blueing slightly when bruised; punctate at top, increasingly longitudinally fibrillose downward, (Breitenbach), equal; bright yellow at top, shading to bright rose red or scarlet in lower part, with yellow basal mycelium, (Phillips), 6cm x 1cm, yellow, spotted red in lower part; smooth, (Bon)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette(3), Breitenbach), pleasant (Phillips)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette(3)), mild, sourish, (Breitenbach), slightly soapy (Phillips)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette(3))
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups on the ground in hardwood forests and mixed woods, especially under oak and beech; July to October^, (Bessette(3)), single to gregarious, in mixed hardwood forests, parks, gardens, and floodplain forests, primarily on calcareous soils; summer to fall, (Breitenbach)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown (Bessette, Phillips), yellow-brown, (Breitenbach)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-13 x 4-5 um, "elliptic, smooth, pale brown"^; cap cuticle a trichodermium of long, tubular, tapered, colorless hyphae, 5-12 um wide and not conspicuously inflated, with dingy ochraceous content in Melzer's reagent, (Bessette(3)), spores 9.5-12.5 x 4.2-6 um, elliptic, smooth, thick-walled, yellowish; basidia 4-spored, 35-45 x 9-13 um, clavate, without basal clamp connection; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia 35-62 x 8.5-11 um, cylindric-lageniform, some with faintly yellow contents; cap cuticle a trichoderm of mostly erect hyphae 6-12 um wide, "some with reddish incrustation", septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), cap cuticle a trichodermium with hyphae 5-11 um wide, walls smooth to minutely roughened, end cells cylindric to subcapitate, 8-25 um broad where enlarged, (Smith), spores up to 12-13 um long, thick-walled; "cap cuticle composed of erect septate hyphae with tapered ends and some encrusted walls", (Trudell)
NAME ORIGIN  'rubellus' is diminutive of 'ruber', Latin for 'red'
SIMILAR  Xerocomellus diffractus and Boletus truncatus are less brightly colored, (Trudell(4)).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus rubellus), Breitenbach(3)* (as Xerocomus rubellus), Trudell(4)* (as Boletus rubellus), Bon(2) (as Xerocomus), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus rubellus), Smith(4) (as Boletus rubellus), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Boletus rubellus), Bessette(2)* (as Boletus rubellus), Bacon(1)* (as Boletus rubellus), Buczacki(1)* (as Xerocomus)
36
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum atrostipitatum  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Mich. Bot. 5: 155-157. 1966
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dull orange to pinkish tan or brownish cap (pale and rather dull colored) that is often patchy when old, 2) flesh that stains pink then purple-gray to blackish, and with FeSO4 turns bluish gray, 3) pores that are pale when young when young, becoming dingier when old, unchanging or staining olive to brownish when bruised, 4) a stem with dense black scabers when young and when mature, and 5) growth with birch.^ | The online Species Fungorum, accessed February 12, 2018, considered this taxon a synonym of Leccinum versipelle (Fr. & Hok) Snell, but MycoBank, accessed the same day, maintained them separately. RANGE ^The distribution is eastern Canada to MN, CO to WA, southern range unknown, (Bessette), AK (Dick(1)), and NS (Grund(11)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh bluish gray with FeSO4; flesh bluish with NH4OH, (Smith)
CAP  6-16cm, convex, margin at first with thin flaps of tissue, at least when young; "dull orange to tan or brownish"; dry to slightly viscid, "fibrillose, breaking up to form downy patches or small scales" when old^, (Bessette), 6-13(18)cm, hemispheric to broadly convex; pale dull orange-buff, "slowly becoming pale orange brownish and finally a dingy pinkish tan", dry, appressed-fibrillose, "becoming obscurely to distinctly appressed-squamulose by maturity, the outer fibrils often grayish", the squamules finally merely brownish; margin exceeding tubes by 0.5cm and this band soon breaking up into segments, (Smith)
FLESH  "white, staining pinkish, then purple-gray to blackish when exposed", especially where cap joins stem^, (Bessette), "white, when cut soon vinaceous-buff and this progressing to violaceous-fuscous", in stem white, color change the same but sometimes staining blue-green in addition toward the base, (Smith)
PORES  2-3 per mm, round, "whitish to buff or pale gray when young, becoming dingier in age, unchanging or staining olive to brownish when bruised"; tube layer 1-1.8cm thick^, (Bessette), minute, adnate-seceding; "staining olive to olive-brown and if severely bruised avellaneous or darker"; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, "olivaceous-pallid when young, then dingy honey-brown and finally wood-brown", (Smith)
STEM  8-15cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal or widening downward, solid; dense layer of scabers that are black when fruitbody young and when mature, on whitish to dingy tan ground color, blue or blue green stains occasionally on lower part; partial veil and ring absent^, (Bessette), 8-15cm x 1-2.5cm at top, up to 4cm wide at base, clavate [club-shaped] becoming equal when old, solid, hard, fibrous; "coarse black ornamentation in the form of points and squamules from button stages to maturity and from base to apex, with a cottony-fibrillose layer beneath this", base may stain bluish green when injured, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  reported by some authors including Bessette(3) as edible, but orange Leccinum species have been implicated in poisoning episodes
HABITAT  single to scattered under hardwoods, usually birch, July to September^, (Bessette), summer, fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette), dull yellow-brown (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-17 x 4-5 um, subfusiform [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, pale brown^; end cells on cap cuticle tubular, yellowish, lacking orange brown granules in Melzer's; caulocystidia clavate to fusoid-ventricose (Bessette), spores 13-17 x 4-5 um, smooth, subfusiform, pale yellow brown in KOH and not changing much in Melzer's reagent, wall slightly thickened; basidia 4-spored, 8-12 um wide, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia "scattered, 30-40 X 8-12 um, fusoid-ventricose, with dull yellow-brown content when revived in KOH or in Melzer's, smooth, thin-walled", cheilocystidia "26-35 X 6-10 um, fusoid-ventricose to clavate, ochraceous in KOH"; cap cuticle of tangled filaments, in KOH the hyphae with yellow to colorless content, when revived in Melzer's yellowish without pigment globules but content granular to homogeneous, hyphae "with cells tubular to somewhat inflated, mostly 6-11 um wide, some rather short, finally disarticulating, the end cells tubular to either narrowly clavate or tapered to apex, walls smooth to minutely asperulate"; caulocystidia "40-120 X 10-25 um, clavate to fusoid-ventricose, content bister in KOH"; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with black stem'
SIMILAR  Leccinum versipelle has a brighter orange cap that is less scaly when old, a darker pore surface when young, flesh that stains bright green with FeSO4, and different caulocystidia, (Bessette). L. versipelle is less associated with birch, has a less patchy cap at maturity, and has different caulocystidia, (Smith).
SOURCES  Smith(35), Bessette(3)*, Dick(1), Grund(11)
37
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum aurantiacum  (Bull.) Gray  group^  Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl. I: 646. 1821
ENGLISH NAME(S)  red-capped scaber-stalk, red-capped scaberstalk, orange-capped scaber-stalk, orange-capped scaberstalk, aspen scaber-stalk, aspen scaberstalk, orange-capped bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a brick-red cap, 2) flesh that turns reddish before becoming bluish black, and 3) the development of pigment globules in cells of the cap cuticle hyphae in Melzer's reagent. The name Leccinum aurantiacum was formerly applied to several similar species, and its presence in North America is disputed.^ | See Kuo(5) (accessed July 10, 2013) under "Leccinum: Uncertain Taxa" for a more detailed discussion. Trudell(4) comment in relation to the Pacific Northwest (Latin names italicized) "A large, often abundant species that has been called Leccinum aurantiacum occurs in our conifer forests. That name, however, is incorrect since L. aurantiacum has been shown to be associated with hardwoods. Our species may be closer to L. vulpinum described from Europe.". RANGE ^Leccinum aurantiacum is said to be "widely distributed across the northern United States and Canada, southern limits unknown", (Bessette). Various observers give a range that includes CA (rare), (Thiers(1)), AK (Dick(1)), CO (Lincoff(2)), WA (reported by numerous observers), OR (R. Bishop, pers. comm.), ID (E. Butler, pers. comm.), MT (L. Evans, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains very pale blue with application of FeSO4 (Bessette)
CAP  5-20.5cm, convex to broadly convex, to nearly flat when old; "orange to brick-red, rusty red, or reddish brown"; dry, appressed-fibrillose when young, often bald when old; "margin with thin flaps of sterile tissue when young"^, (Bessette), 8-15cm, convex to broadly convex or flat-convex; bright rust brown to brick red; "dry, dull, uneven, or roughened, finely to matted-fibrillose when young", unchanging or appearing bald when older, "sometimes finely and obscurely areolate"; margin with conspicuous sterile band, (Thiers(1)), bright to dull ferruginous-red but often with a pallid area where covered by debris; dry and uneven, roughened or appressed-fibrillose, when old more or less bald and subviscid, (Smith(35)), red to reddish orange-brown or dark reddish brown; fibrillose, (Trudell)
FLESH  "white, slowly staining pinkish to wine-red then gradually darkening to purple-gray or blackish when exposed", especially at junction between cap and stem^, (Bessette), 2-3cm thick, white when first exposed, changing to vinaceous to near flesh color, then gray to bluish gray or black, (Thiers(1)), white, when cut slowly staining vinaceous then grayish and then slowly fuscous, in the stem when cut "pallid at first but staining to fuscous in the upper part, sometimes staining caerulean blue in the base and in places strongly reddish to red-brown", (Smith(35)), whitish, "changes slightly or more distinctly to grayish or blackish, sometimes after going through a vinaceous gray phase", (Trudell)
PORES  2-3 per mm, round; "whitish when young, becoming dingier and grayish to olive-buff to pale olive-brown in age, unchanging or staining olive, brownish or burgundy-brown when cut or bruised"; tube layer 1-2cm thick^, (Bessette), 1-2 per mm, angular; "staining olive to olive brown to vinaceous brown when bruised"; tube layer 1-2cm thick, adnate to depressed when young, becoming deeply and narrowly depressed when old, when young pale olive, darkening to olive drab or becoming brown at maturity, (Thiers(1)), "when lightly bruised pores staining olive to olive-brown but where severely bruised stained avellaneous or darker", (Smith(35))
STEM  10-16cm x 2-3cm, equal or widening downward, solid; "whitish, with whitish to buff scabers that darken to orange-brown to reddish brown and finally blackish brown, at least over the lower portion, occasionally with blue-green or yellowish stains on the lower portion"; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 10-17cm x 2-3cm at top, clavate [club-shaped] to ventricose [wider in middle], becoming equal, often narrowed at base and top, solid; whitish to white, squamules pallid at first, black or dark brown when old, occasionally staining blue in base; dry, (Thiers(1)), with black scabers, base blueing, (Trudell)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  reported by some authors including Bessette(3) as edible, but orange Leccinum species have been implicated in poisoning episodes
HABITAT  scattered or in groups under aspen or pine, July to September^, (Bessette), summer and fall (Bacon)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette, Thiers), dark yellow-brown to dull cinnamon (Smith(35))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-18 x 3.5-5 um, subfusiform [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, pale brown^; end cells of cap cuticle "narrowly clavate to tubular or slightly tapered, content orange-brown and forming globules of various sizes in Melzer's solution"; caulocystidia clavate to cylindric, (Bessette), spores 12-13.5 x 3.5-4.5 um, (up to 28 um long from 1-spored basidia), fusoid to subelliptic, smooth, pale ochraceous in KOH, yellow brown in Melzer's reagent, thin-walled; basidia 1-spored to 4-spored, 30-55 x 9-11 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia scattered, deeply embedded, 30-40 x 9-11 um, clavate to fusoid, colorless in KOH, thin-walled; cap cuticle "a tangled trichoderm, pale ochraceous in KOH, hyphae 7-11 um wide, considerable disarticulation of cells noted, walls often asperulate, pigment globules formed when mounted in Melzer's reagent, terminal cells not strongly differentiated, no short intermediate cells present"; caulocystidia "38-48 X 8-13 um, dark brown in KOH, clavate, with large fusoid-ventricose cells interspersed"; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores 13-16(18) x 3.5-4.5(5) um, subfusiform, smooth; basidia 4-spored, 8-9 um broad, clavate; pleurocystidia rare to scattered, 35-60 x 8-12 um, apices obtuse, cheilocystidia 18-26 x 5-8(10) um, clavate to subfusoid; cap cuticle "of appressed interwoven hyphae 5-12(15) um wide, cells elongate (mostly more than 5 times as long as broad), walls thin, smooth, some minutely roughened, the cells disarticulating to some extent; the end-cells narrowly clavate to tubular or near apex slightly tapered", in Melzer's the content orange-brown and forming globules often filling the cells; caulocystidia mostly clavate, 9-30 um wide, a few cylindric, smooth, (Smith(35))
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin, "golden orange"^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Leccinum discolor has duller cap colors (dull orange brown to dull cinnamon), and lacks orange-brown pigment globules in the cap cuticle hyphae when revived in Melzer's reagent, (Bessette). Leccinum insigne has flesh that stains bluish gray to blackish without an intervening reddish or pinkish phase, and grows under birch as well as aspen, (Bessette). L. insigne is ornamented by maturity with black scabers, but Leccinum aurantiacum may not reach this state till old age; hyphae of the cap cuticle of L. aurantiacum are relatively smooth in contrast to those of L. insigne, (Smith(35)). Leccinum idahoense has a dark liver-brown granulose-areolate cap, is very slow change to gray when the flesh is cut, and has a relatively pale cinnamon spore deposit, (Smith(37)).
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Thiers(13), Bessette(3)*, Trudell(4), Smith(35), Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Dick(1), Smith(37), Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Kuo(5), MacKinnon(1)*
38
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum brunneum  Thiers^  Mycologia 63: 269. 1971
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dull dark brown cap with marginal flaps of tissue, 2) flesh that turns fuscous with no intermediate reddish phase, and sometimes becomes blue in base, 3) white pores that become pale olive and bruise brown, 4) stem with scabers that are white to darker, and 5) growth under aspen.^ | Note that this is not the same as Leccinum insigne var. brunneum Thiers, which was described from California in the same paper. The description derived from Thiers(1) except where specified. RANGE ^L. brunneum was described from CA but was also reported from ID by Dr. H. Thiers who described it (pers. comm. to L. Norvell, 1986).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^no distinctive reactions observed (Thiers(13))
CAP  6-10cm, convex becoming broadly convex to cushion-shaped to irregular in outline; dark brown ("bister" to "warm sepia" to "Prout's brown", colors from Ridgway), sometimes somewhat paler brown when old ("cinnamon-brown" to "Verona brown" to "snuff brown"), drying dark dull brown; dry, but may be viscid or subviscid in wet weather, dull, bald to finely subtomentose [somewhat tomentose] or obscurely appressed-fibrillose, occasionally becoming somewhat fibrillose when old; margin with conspicuous sterile flaps of tissue
FLESH  1-2.5cm thick, "white when first exposed, changing to fuscous with no reddish intermediate phase, fuscous color sometimes fading after prolonged exposure"; in stem, white when first exposed, becoming fuscous directly as in cap, sometimes becoming blue in base
PORES  up to 1mm, angular, colored as tubes; tube layer 1-2cm thick, depressed, white when young becoming pale olive when mature, staining brown when bruised, color fading in some after bruising
STEM  8-15cm x 1.5-3(4)cm at top, club-shaped, solid; dry, white ground color, covered with small squamules that are white at first becoming darker with maturity
ODOR  mild
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  unknown (Thiers)
HABITAT  gregarious to scattered on ground under aspen
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores (14)15.5-19.5 x 4-6 um, fusoid to subcylindric [nearly cylindric] to subelliptic [nearly elliptic], smooth, some dextrinoid, in KOH ochraceous, walls moderately thick^; basidia 4-spored, 30-35 x 7-11 um, clavate to pear-shaped, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia scattered to abundant, often inconspicuous, 35-50 x 8-12 um, fusoid to fusoid-ventricose to clavate, some staining pale brown in KOH and dark reddish brown in Melzer's reagent; cap cuticle a trichodermium of tangled hyphal tips, pale ochraceous in KOH, tawny to russet in Melzer's reagent, hyphae 11-15 um wide, walls sometimes asperulate, pigment globules not forming when mounted in Melzer's reagent, "terminal cells relatively long and narrow, tapered somewhat at the tip"; caulocystidia "24-37 x 7-12 um, clavate to fusoid to clavate with elongated, tapering apices", typically dark brown, but sometimes colorless in KOH; clamp connections absent
NAME ORIGIN  means 'brown'
SIMILAR  Leccinum fibrillosum can be confused according to Thiers, but cut flesh turns fuscous with an intermediate reddish phase, the cap is normally more red-brown and more fibrillose, and growth is under conifers. See also SIMILAR section of Leccinum scabrum.
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Thiers(13), Desjardin(6)*
39
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum clavatum  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Mich. Bot. 5: 135. 1966
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include a whitish to tan, somewhat viscid cap, white flesh that stains directly bluish gray when cut, whitish pores that bruise brown, a club-shaped stem with scabers that slowly become dull brown, and growth under conifers.^ RANGE ^Leccinum clavatum is known only from the Pacific Northwest and the northern Rocky Mountains, (Bessette). The type from ID, and it also occurs in CA, (Both).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  8-20cm, pallid becoming crust-brown; dry becoming subviscid [somewhat viscid], appressed fibrillose when young, (Smith(4)), whitish to tan, with band of sterile tissue on the margin, (Bessette)^, 8-20cm, "convex becoming broadly convex, margin appendiculate as in L. aurantiacum", cap margin often intergrown with stem; white to pallid ("tilleul-buff"), when young, gradually becoming pale tan ("pinkish-buff" to "cinnamon-buff") on disc or over all when old; "typically dry, when old and moist somewhat viscid, appressed fibrillose-tomentose", the fibrils becoming aggregated into small appressed scales over all when old, areolate [cracked like dried mud], (Smith(38))
FLESH  white, staining directly bluish gray in young specimens when cut^, (Smith), white, slowly stains fuscous without a reddish phase when exposed, (Bessette), 2-3cm thick, soft and spongy; white, turning bluish gray in young specimens when cut, unchanging in old caps; in stem white "except for the yellowish to greenish-yellow base in old specimens", (Smith(38))
PORES  2 per mm, whitish at first, bruising dingy yellowish then dingy brown^, (Smith(4)), 2 per mm, round, not stuffed, with thin walls; "whitish, gradually yellowish or if bruised sordid olive-yellow, when young quickly changing to brownish where bruised", tube layer 1-2cm thick, "depressed, whitish when young, soon dingy avellaneous, changing to brownish where bruised", (Smith(38))
STEM  4-8cm x 1.5-3cm, clavate, up to 7cm thick at base, white with scabers that slowly become dull brown^, (Smith(4)), 4-8cm x 1.5-3cm, bulbous base up to 7cm wide, solid; 'white at first, densely scabrous, scabrosity slowly darkening to dull brown, in old specimens surface may appear coarsely fibrillose with the fibrils toward the base dark brown, staining blue where cut or handled ("light methyl blue")', note young buttons did not give this change but in time changed to pinkish, (Smith(38))
ODOR  faintly fragrant^ (Smith(38))
TASTE  mild to nutty^ (Smith(38))
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  type gregarious under spruce and fir^, (Smith(38))
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark rusty brown^ ("Mars brown"), (Smith(38))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14-18(19) x 4-5 um^, end cells of cap cuticle tubular to narrowly clavate; caulocystidia clavate, mucronate or fusoid-ventricose, all mixed together, (Smith(4)), spores 14-18(19) x 4-5 um, narrowly subfusoid, smooth, yellowish or a few reddish tawny in Melzer's reagent, yellowish transparent to dingy ochraceous revived in KOH, wall relatively thin; basidia 4-spored, 28-34 x 8-10 um, very delicate and soon collapsing; pleurocystidia "scattered, 34-46 x 8-12 um, fusoid-ventricose with tapered curved neck and subacute apices", colorless to yellowish or darker as revived, smooth, thin-walled, cheilocystidia "similar to pleurocystidia but neck less elongated"; caulocystidia 36-57 x 10-16(20) um, clavate to fusoid-ventricose or mucronate, content pale ochraceous, walls smooth and thin, caulobasidia [basidia on the stem] and basidioles "18-33 x 7-12 um, content ochraceous, often merely in the form of unenlarged hyphal tips but mostly clavate"; cap cutis a matted down aggregation of fibrils with content yellowish to yellowish-brown when revived in KOH and yellowish transparent in Melzer's reagent, the end-cells 5-15 um wide and tubular to narrowly clavate, hyphal cells tending to disarticulate in mounts from old caps, walls smooth and thin; hyphae of context 10-15(20) um wide, interwoven, yellowish transparent to pale orange when revived in Melzer's reagent; clamp connections none, (Smith(38))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'clavate' or 'club-shaped', referring to stem
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Smith(38), Smith(4), Bessette(3), Both(1)
40
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum cyaneobasileucum  Lannoy & Estades^  Docums Mycol. 21(no. 81): 23. 1991;  Leccinum brunneogriseolum  Lannoy & Estades
ENGLISH NAME(S)  bluing birch bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a dark grayish brown to tan-colored cap that is suedelike on the surface, 2) flesh that does not turn blue above the stem base, 3) pore surface that is creamy white to beige when young with small pores, the tubes depressed, 4) a club-shaped whitish stem that is densely covered with small plaques and scabers at first that gradually blacken, the stem base often with blue-green blotches and slowly bluing when scraped, and 5) growth with birches, often in urban areas.^ RANGE ^Leccinum cyaneobasileucum is found in CA (Siegel(2)) and also occurs in the Pacific Northwest at least in OR, (N. Siegel, pers. comm.). It was described from France and occurs elsewhere in Europe including (Buczacki(1)) Britain/Ireland.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^KOH orange on cap, yellow in stem flesh
CAP  4-12cm across, "hemispheric at first, soon bun shaped, to broadly convex", sometimes uplifted with a wavy margin when old; dark gray to grayish brown or tan, "sometimes paler beige", "usually with a narrow white band around margin"; "moist to dry, suedelike to finely tomentose, often bumpy and rough at first, becoming nearly smooth"^, (Siegel), 5-16cm, hazel-brown, fulvous-brown, or walnut-brown; dry but may be tacky in wet weather, (Phillips)
FLESH  solid; whitish marbled with beige, unchanging^, (Siegel), "white, flushing pale pink, sometimes blue-green" (Phillips), "soft, unchanging or becoming slightly pinkish in cap and stem apex", usually "with bluish staining in base and where damaged by snails or insects", (Buczacki)
PORES  "round, tiny at first", staying small when old; creamy white to beige when young, "soon pale buff", dingy when old; tubes deeply depressed at stem, relatively short at first, becoming long^, (Siegel), pores small, angular, white-gray, bruising brownish; tubes white-grayish (Buczacki)
STEM  5-15cm x 1-3cm, cylindric "with a swollen, club-shaped base, usually tall and straight"; white to creamy white, "but covered in small plaques and scabers" which are "very pale and dense at first but soon become light gray to dusky gray and then nearly black and more spread out" as the stem elongates, base "often with bright teal to blue-green blotches, and slowly bluing when scraped"^, (Siegel), 7-20cm x 0.8-2.0cm (Phillips), the dense covering of white woolly scales may later turn grayish and cause the entire stem to appear woolly (Buczacki)
ODOR  indistinct
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  edible, "and with a good flavor, but often quite slimy in texture", (Siegel)
HABITAT  single or scattered in troops, "sometimes in large numbers on urban lawns under planted birches"; in California Redwood Coast frequently found with Russula versicolor, Paxillus cuprinus, Lactarius pubescens var. betulae, and Cortinarius hemitrichus, and common in late summer and early fall^, (Siegel), with birch in moss, but not normally in Sphagnum, summer to fall, (Phillips), on soil and peat on heathland, moorland and other acidic sites with birch, sometimes among mosses although often in drier habitats and not usually with Sphagnum, (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dusky brown^ (Siegel), walnut brown (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-21 x 3.5-7 um, "spindle-shaped, smooth"^
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Leccinum scabrum also occurs under urban birches but "has a dark brown cap when young and darker, denser scabers, and lacks the blue-green stains on the stipe", (Siegel(2)).
SOURCES  Siegel(2)*, Buczacki(1)*, Phillips(3)* (including the white variation)
41
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum discolor  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Mich. Bot. 5: 152-153. 1966
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry to subviscid cap that is orange brown and nearly bald, 2) white flesh that changes to pinkish then blackish, 3) white pores that become pale olive-brown and when bruised stain dark brown, 4) a white stem with conspicuous scabers that turn from whitish to dark brown or black, 5) growth under pine and aspen, and 6) microscopic characters including the absence of orange-brown pigment globules in the cap cuticle hyphae.^ | Leccinum discolor is one of the species previously identified as L. aurantiacum (Theirs(13)). RANGE ^It is found from eastern Canada west to ID, MT, WY, CO, and CA, (Bessette). It has been reported from BC (M. Beug, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  7-15cm, hemispheric to convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; "dull orange-brown to orange-cinnamon or orange-yellow", becoming dull cinnamon when old; dry to subviscid, nearly bald; margin with flaps of sterile tissue^, (Bessette), 10-15cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat-convex to depressed on disc to occasionally irregular in outline; brown to orange-red to sometimes pale buff; "dry to subviscid, dull, often shallowly pitted or reticulate", bald "but often appearing tomentose or fibrillose", sometimes cracked-areolate [cracked like dried mud] near margin; margin with typical sterile flaps, (Thiers(1))
FLESH  "white when exposed, staining pinkish to brownish orange, then fuscous"^, (Bessette), 1-3cm thick, white when first exposed, changing to flesh color to pink then blackish, (Thiers(1))
PORES  1-2 per mm, angular; "white at first, becoming greenish yellow to pale olive-brown", "staining dark brown when bruised"; tube layer 1-2cm thick, becoming depressed near stem when mature^, (Bessette), 0.5-1mm, angular, colored as tubes; tube layer 1-2cm thick, depressed, white when young, becoming pale olive-brown when mature, staining dark brown when bruised, (Thiers(1))
STEM  6-12cm x 1-3cm, nearly equal or widening downward, solid; with conspicuous scabers that are whitish when young and dark brown to black when old over whitish ground color; dry; basal mycelium white; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 6-12cm x 1-3cm at top, equal to club-shaped, solid; white to whitish ground color, conspicuously ornamented, squamules white to pallid when young, becoming dark brown to black when old; dry; white mycelium at base, (Thiers(1))
ODOR  mild^ (Thiers(1))
TASTE  mild^ (Thiers(1))
EDIBILITY  reported by Theirs(1) as edible, but orange Leccinum species have been implicated in poisoning episodes
HABITAT  single, scattered or in groups on ground under pine and aspen^, (Bessette), single to scattered in soil under aspen (Thiers(13))
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette, Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 15-20 x 4.5-6.5 um, fusoid [spindle-shaped] to subcylindric [nearly cylindric], smooth, some producing a dextrinoid reaction, ochraceous^; cap cuticle hyphae lacking orange-brown pigment globules when revived in Melzer's reagent, (Bessette), spores 15.5-20 x 4.5-6.5 um, fusoid to subcylindric, smooth, ochraceous in KOH and Melzer's reagent, some showing a dextrinoid reaction, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 30-37 x 9-12 um, clavate to pear-shaped, colorless and with granular contents in KOH; hymenial cystidia 30-46 x 8-15 um, "fusoid to clavate with elongated, tapering apices", colorless to sometimes appearing filled with dark brown amorphous material in KOH, thin-walled; cap cuticle a tangled trichodermium of free hyphal tips, buff in KOH, ochraceous tawny in Melzer's reagent, "hyphae 8-10 um wide, walls smooth to asperulate and sometimes appearing incrusted, considerable disarticulation of cells noted, terminal cells only slightly narrowed at apex"; caulocystidia 25-45 x 10-17 um, "clavate to mucronate to subfusoid", mostly dark brown in KOH but some colorless cells present, "an occasional large cell interspersed", walls smooth, thin; clamp connections absent, (Thiers(1))
NAME ORIGIN  means "of a different color", (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Leccinum aurantiacum has an abundance of pigment globules formed within the cells of the cap cuticle, whereas in L. discolor the contents remain homogeneous or only become finely granular, (Thiers). Leccinum insigne does not have a reddish phase in the discoloration of the exposed flesh, (Thiers).
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Bessette(3)*, Thiers(13), Both(1), Desjardin(6)*
42
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum fallax  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Mich. Bot. 5: 146. 1966
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dark red to ferruginous-red cap that is dry and appears fibrillose under a hand lens, 2) white flesh that slowly turns dingy vinaceous then dark gray when cut and that stains blue-green in the stem base, 3) pallid to grayish pores that bruise slightly yellowish to green then brownish, 4) a conspicuously club-shaped - bulbous stem that is white with scabers gradually becoming brownish to dark brown but not black, and 5) microscopic characters including pigment balls that form in Melzer's reagent.^ RANGE ^The type was found in ID.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  6-20cm, convex, dark red to ferruginous-red; dry, matted-fibrillose^, (Smith(4)), appears fibrillose only when examined under a lens (Bessette), 6-20cm, obtuse to convex expanding to broadly convex, margin appendiculate from sterile parts of overgrown cap margin; evenly rufous overall; dry, matted-fibrillose under hand lens, (Smith(38))
FLESH  thick; white, slowly staining dingy vinaceous then gray when cut^, (Smith(4)), thick, soft; "white slowly staining dingy grayish vinaceous where bruised or cut", in stem white, "staining reddish slowly when cut and finally going to blackish", staining bluish-green in base when damaged, (Smith(38))
PORES  "pallid to grayish, when bruised slightly staining yellowish to green and then brownish"^, (Smith(4)), small, round; "pallid to grayish staining slowly when bruised to yellowish green and then brownish or at times merely olive-yellowish"; tube layer 1-2cm thick, depressed around stem, "whitish, slowly becoming pale avellaneous, finally near wood-brown", (Smith(38))
STEM  5-14cm x 1-4cm near top, short-clavate with base up to 8cm wide; "white at first, ornamentation gradually becoming brownish to dark brown finally but not black"^, (Smith(4)), 6-14cm x 1-4cm, clavate [club-shaped] bulb up to 8cm wide, becoming nearly equal when old, solid; white, staining bluish-green around the base when handled or damaged; stem surface "scabrous-roughened, the scabrosity gradually staining dark brownish but not blackish even when dried", (Smith(38))
ODOR  mild^ (Smith(38))
TASTE  mild^ (Smith(38))
EDIBILITY  orange Leccinum species have been implicated in poisoning episodes
HABITAT  type gregarious under spruce^, (Smith(38))
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14-17 x 3.2-4.5 um^, cap cuticle of hyphae having content aggregating into globules when mounted in Melzer's reagent, end-cells subcylindric to narrowly clavate; caulocystidia up to 20 um broad, mostly clavate, content colorless to yellowish in KOH, (Smith(4)), spores 14-17 x 3.2-4.5 um, narrowly subfusoid, smooth, pale to bright tan in Melzer's reagent, yellowish in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 26-37 x 8-10 um; pleurocystidia scattered, 44-60 x 9-15 um, fusoid-ventricose, obtuse to subacute, colorless or with ochraceous content, smooth, thin-walled, cheilocystidia 18-30 x 5-8 um, clavate to subfusoid, dull ochraceous in KOH; caulocystidia mostly clavate and 9-14 um wide but some up to 20 um wide, mostly not with a projecting neck, content colorless to yellowish in KOH, walls thin and smooth; cap cutis of appressed hyphae 4-11 um wide, with dull orange-brown content in KOH, in Melzer's reagent the content orange-cinnamon to orange-red and aggregating into pigment balls, cells not or only slightly constricted at the septa, "end-cell nearly equal in width throughout or narrowly clavate to a short-tapered apex, walls thin and many hyphae with asperulate walls"; context hyphae orange to red when revived in Melzer's; all hyphae inamyloid; clamp connections absent, (Smith(38)) 
NAME ORIGIN  means 'false'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Smith(38), Smith(4), Bessette(3)
43
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum fibrillosum  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Mich. Bot. 5: 152-153. 1966
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry cap that is dark reddish brown or liver brown, conspicuously fibrillose at first becoming finely scaly, 2) white flesh that turns pinkish then purplish, 3) pores that are dingy buff when young and bruise yellow-brown, 4) a stem with dark blackish brown scabers, and 5) growth under conifers.^ | Leccinum fibrillosum is found in the Rocky Mountains west to WA and north to western Canada, (Bessette(3)). RANGE ^Distribution includes eastern WA, ID, MT, WY, CO, and AB, (Bessette(1)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh greenish blue with application of FeSO4, (Bessette(3))
CAP  6-25cm, obtuse to convex to flat, margin with band of sterile tissue; dark reddish brown fibrils and fine scales on paler reddish brown ground; dry^, (Bessette(3)), dry to sticky in moist weather; margin appendiculate with 1-2mm of sterile tissue, (Bessette(1)), 8-25cm, convex; dark liver brown; conspicuously fibrillose at first, changing from matted fibrillose to finely scaly, at times with overtone of grayish fibrils, (Smith)
FLESH  white, immediately flushing pink when exposed then changing to dull bluish red to bluish purple or fuscous^, (Bessette(3)), firm; white, immediately flushing pink in cap and upper stem when cut or bruised, "then changing to muddy bluish red to bluish purple or fuscous in 3 to 4 minutes, often nearly black after several minutes", (Bessette(1)), staining vinaceous then purple-drab (Smith)
PORES  1-2 per mm when mature, round to angular, buff to pale olivaceous, when old becoming olive-brown; staining brown when bruised; tube layer 0.5-1.7cm thick^, (Bessette(3)), at first 3-4 per mm, than 1-2mm when old, (Bessette(1)), dingy buff when young, staining yellow-brown where slightly injured, (Smith)
STEM  7-11cm x 2.5-4.5cm, nearly equal or narrowing or widening downward, solid; dark blackish brown scabers on white ground; dry; partial veil and ring absent^, (Bessette(3)), 4-12cm x 2-5cm, "densely coated with woolly-scabrous material that forms squamules that blacken", (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette(3))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette(3))
EDIBILITY  reported by some authors including Bessette(3) as edible, but orange Leccinum species have been implicated in poisoning episodes
HABITAT  scattered or grouped under conifers, especially Engelmann Spruce and Lodgepole Pine^, (Bessette(3)), late summer and early fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown^ (Bessette(3))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14-18 x 3.5-5 um, elliptic, smooth, yellow-brown^; caulocystidia fusiform to ovate, and often pointed, (Bessette(3)), spores 14-18(20) x 3.8-5 um, cap cuticle of tubular hyphae 6-12 um wide, end cells tubular to weakly cystidioid, content of cells not forming globules in Melzer's; caulocystidia mostly ovate-pointed, (Smith), spores 14-18 x 3.8-5 um, elliptic, yellow-brown in Melzer's reagent and KOH, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 23-36 x 8-11 um, clavate, thin-walled; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia 35-43 x 7-8.5 um, fusiform to fusoid-ventricose, colorless to dark yellow-brown in KOH, thin-walled; cap cuticle a trichodermium of erect or tangled hyphae 6-12 um wide, end cells somewhat cystidioid; caulocystidia 23-60 x 8-18 um, thin-walled, fusiform to ovate, often pointed, (Bessette(1))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'fibrillose'
SIMILAR  Leccinum brunneum can be confused with this species but it has a dull, dark brown cap that is not strongly fibrillose, its flesh turns fuscous with no intervening reddish phase, and it grows under aspen, (Thiers(1)).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Bessette(1)*, Miller(14)*, Smith(4), Thiers(1), Marrone(1)*
44
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum holopus  (Rostk.) Watling^  Trans. Brit. Mycol. Soc. 43: 692. 1960
ENGLISH NAME(S)  pale rough-stem, white birch-bolete, white bog-bolete, ghost bolete
NOTES  Features include a whitish cap that is bald and may be viscid, white unchanging flesh, whitish pores that may bruise yellowish or brownish, a whitish stem with scabers that become brown, and bog habitat.^ | The description here is for var. holopus: var. americanus is nearly identical but the cap is white at first, soon becoming dull vinaceous buff, with white context that changes to reddish when cut, (Bessette). RANGE ^The distribution of var. holopus as eastern Canada south to New York, west to the northern Rocky Mountains, of var. americanus eastern Canada south to NY, west to MI, (Bessette). L. holopus has been reported from BC and NB (collections at the University of British Columbia), ID (M. Beug, pers. comm.), AK and VT (collections at University of Washington), NS (Grund), and Europe (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle displays a pink flash lasting less than one second, then negative, with application of KOH, flesh stains slightly olive with application of FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  3-10cm, acutely convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old; "white or whitish when young, occasionally with gray, buff, tan, or pinkish tints", often darkening when old age and developing a greenish tinge; often viscid when moist or when old, bald or nearly so; margin with narrow sterile band of tissue^, (Bessette), 3-10cm, cushion-shaped to convex, becoming broadly convex or nearly flat; "dull white and remaining this color or if water-soaked olivaceous along a broad marginal area, disc often tinged buff to vinaceous-buff, rarely pea-green overall in age"; soft, subviscid, when old or wet slightly more viscid, typically bald and unpolished "but some slightly areolate at times over disc, rarely with inconspicuous streaks from appressed fibrils"; margin often exceeding tubes by 0.05cm, (Smith)
FLESH  "white, unchanging when cut or rubbed"^, (Bessette), thick, soft, white, when cut not staining or finally brownish (especially around larval tunnels); in stem not staining pink in apex when cut, but greenish to bluish in the stem base when mature, (Smith), take note of different staining reaction of var. americanus under NOTES
PORES  2-3 per mm, round; "whitish to slightly grayish or pale dingy brown, unchanging or staining yellowish or brownish when cut or bruised"; tube layer 1-2.5cm thick^, (Bessette), whitish becoming brownish, "when bruised staining yellow and then brown"; tube layer 1-2.5cm thick, adnate but soon deeply depressed around stem, pallid to pale olive-buff, when old wood-brown, (Smith)
STEM  8-14cm x 1-2cm, equal or widening slightly downward, solid; whitish ground color with scabers that are whitish when young and darken to tan or darker when old, "occasionally with greenish stains on the lower portion"; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 8-14cm x 1-2cm, equal or nearly so; pallid, ornamented with squamules that become brownish (rarely blackish), top merely scurfy and remaining pallid a long time, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  single to scattered on ground in and around bogs, cedar swamps or wet birch woods^, (Bessette), scattered to single in cold bogs, cedar swamps, etc., (Smith), summer to fall, (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette), cinnamon-brown (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14-20 x 5-6.5 um, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, pale brown^, (Bessette), spores 14-20 x 5-6.5 um, subfusoid, smooth, yellowish in Melzer's reagent when immature and dark reddish brown when mature, pale dingy cinnamon to ochraceous-cinnamon revived in KOH, no apical pore seen, wall slightly thickened; basidia 4-spored, 26-32 x 8-11 um, clavate with colorless to pale cinnamon content in KOH, yellowish in Melzer's reagent; pleurocystidia scattered to rare, almost embedded in hymenium, 28-36 x 9-12 um, fusoid-ventricose, content not distinctive; cap cuticle a trichodermium of interwoven subgelatinous hyphae 4-7 um wide, "end-cells tubular to somewhat cystidioid with obtuse apex"; caulocystidia "mostly the fusoid-ventricose type with elongate somewhat flexuous necks and subacute apex", clavate cells also present; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "with perfect stalk", (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Leccinum rotundifoliae has a white to tan or grayish tan cap that becomes pinkish buff to cinnamon-buff or darker (as opposed to L. holopus which has a cap that is whitish to grayish when young, darkening when old and often developing a greenish or olive tinge), (Bessette).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Smith(35), Phillips(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (var. americanum), Courtecuisse(1)*, Breitenbach(3)*, Grund(11), Buczacki(1)* 
45
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum idahoense  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Lloydia 31: 256-257. 1968
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dark brown viscid granular cracked cap, 2) whitish flesh that becomes vinaceous gray in 15 minutes, 3) small whitish to olive-buff pores that bruise brown, 4) dingy cinnamon-buff scabers that become blackish in the lower half of the stem, and 5) relatively pale cinnamon spore deposit.^ RANGE ^Leccinum idahoense is found in ID, but "distribution limits remain to be established", (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh slightly greenish with FeSO4, (Smith(37))
CAP  8-15cm, convex, margin incurved at first, narrow band of marginal tissue breaks into segments when old; uniform dark brown; "viscid, granulose-areolate"^, (Bessette), 8-15cm, broadly convex; dark liver-brown; granulose-areolate (like 'Boletus' mirabilis), very viscid even in dry weather; "sterile margin breaking into small segments but definitely forming a sterile band at first", (Smith(37)), 8-13(20)cm, dark liver brown; viscid, granulose-roughened, (Smith(4))
FLESH  "whitish, very slowly staining vinaceous gray (taking up to 15 minutes) when exposed"^, (Bessette), pallid, when cut unchanging or in top of stem slowly slightly vinaceous gray in 15 minutes, with a watery line above tubes when mature, (Smith(37)), pallid, when cut turning faintly vinaceous-gray in about 15 minutes, (Smith(4))
PORES  2-3 per mm, round to angular, whitish becoming pale olive-buff when mature, bruising brown; tube layer 1-2cm thick, depressed near stem when old^, (Bessette), up to 3 per mm; pale olive-buff when mature, where bruised "severely changing to vinaceous brown or finally to wood-brown, where bruised slightly staining olive"; tube layer about 2cm thick, depressed, pallid when young, slowly changing to vinaceous gray on cutting, (Smith(37)), "small and staining olive when lightly bruised, pale olive buff when young", (Smith(4))
STEM  7-12cm x 2-3.5cm, widening downward or nearly equal, with constricted base, stem solid; "whitish, with dingy cinnamon-buff scabers that become blackish, especially near the base, in age"; dry; partial veil and ring absent^, (Bessette), 8-12cm x 2.5-3.5cm in upper part, solid, equal, flared at top in some, more or less clavate [club-shaped] when young, appearing pinched off at base; pallid, with dingy cinnamon-buff ornamentation in upper part, finally nearly blackish in lower part, "exterior at base stained greenish", (Smith(37)), 8-12cm x 2.5-3.5cm, pinched off at base, scabers "cinnamon buff but finally blackish over lower half", (Smith(4))
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild (Smith(37))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild (Smith(37))
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  single or scattered on ground under conifers^, (Bessette), under western cedar, hemlock, and western white pine mixed, (Smith(4))
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^, (Bessette), dingy cinnamon when air-dried (Smith(4)), "Sayal-brown" (Ridgway color) when moist, pale cinnamon after loss of moisture as in most species of Suillus, (Smith(37))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-17 x 4-5 um, subfusoid (somewhat spindle-shaped), smooth, dull ocher-yellow^, (Bessette), spores 13-16(17) x 3.8-5.2 um, subfusoid, smooth, nearly colorless in Melzer's reagent "but many becoming bright cinnamon overall or only in the distal portion", dull ocher-yellow in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 22-30 x 10-15 um, clavate, colorless revived in KOH and with large oil droplet; pleurocystidia scattered, 38-52 x 9-16 um, "ventricose with slightly enlarged apex above a narrowly tapered neck, or obtusely fusoid-ventricose, with smoky brown content when revived in KOH"; cap cuticle a tangled turf of hyphae 4-7(10) um wide, "with cells often short but not enlarged, in KOH or Melzer's filled with orange-brown droplets of pigment, end-cells tubular with obtuse apex to somewhat cystidioid but not conspicuously inflated, many hyphae with disarticulating cells"; caulocystidia 24-42 x 8-15 um, "fusoid-ventricose, thin-walled, the content smoky brown in KOH", caulocystidioles 20-25 x 8-12 um, "not greatly enlarged, with smoky brown content and thin smooth walls"; clamp connections not seen, (Smith(37)), 13-16(17) x 3.8-5.2 um; hyphae of cap cuticle 4-7(10) um wide, filled with orange-brown globules in Melzer's, (Smith(4))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'from Idaho'
SIMILAR  Leccinum aurantiacum differs from L. idahoense in the latter's dark liver-brown granulose-areolate cap, its very slow change to gray when the flesh is cut, and its relatively pale cinnamon spore deposit, (Smith(37)).
SOURCES  Smith(37), Bessette(3), Smith(4) (as L. idahoensis)
46
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum insigne  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Mich. Bot. 5: 160-161. 1966
ENGLISH NAME(S)  aspen scaber-stalk, aspen scaberstalk, aspen rough-stem, aspen bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a reddish brown, dry cap that is minutely granular to fibrillose-scaly, 2) whitish flesh that with exposure turns purplish gray then blackish without an intervening reddish phase, 3) white pores that darken but do not become blue, 4) a stem with pallid scabers (fine scales) that become dark brown to black, the stem base sometimes turning blue, 5) growth under aspen or birch, and 6) brown spore deposit.^ |In addition to the type variety from CA, Thiers describes var. brunneum from CA with a young cap that is dark brown to reddish brown and more or less bald (as opposed to brick red to ferruginous and tomentose to fibrillose for the type variety when young), (Thiers(13)). |"The dark brown pileus when young with a tendency to fade somewhat with age and the dull, dark brown color when dried readily distinguish this variety from others that have been described." (Thiers(13)). |Smith(35) describes from MI var. luteopallidum with tubes that become yellowish before the darkening of maturity as well as several invalidly published forms. |Leccinum insigne is common in suitable habitat. RANGE ^Distribution includes CA (type variety and var. brunneum) and MI (var. luteopallidum). L. insigne is reported from WA and ID, (A. Parker, pers. comm.), BC (M. Beug pers. comm.), and MT (L. Evans, pers. comm.). The range includes eastern Canada south to NJ, west to the northern Rocky Mountains, south to the Sierra Nevada of CA and the Southwest (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains bluish with application of FeSO4 (Bessette)
CAP  4-15cm, convex becoming broadly convex; rusty orange to rusty cinnamon or rusty brown; dry, minutely granular to fibrillose-scaly; margin with band of sterile tissue when young^, (Bessette), 6-17cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat-convex to highly irregular with broad shallow depressions or pits; color variable but typically some shade of reddish brown, and somewhat variegated when old; dry to moist, occasionally subviscid when wet, bald to finely velvety to subtomentose when young, not changing or sometimes becoming obscurely appressed-fibrillose or appressed-scaly when old, often finely areolate to cracked-areolate when old; margin with sterile flaps of tissue, (Thiers(1)), color variable: bright orange to rusty orange, reddish orange, orange-brown, reddish brown, or cinnamon, often paler or duller (tan, brown, or dull orange-brown) when old, (Arora)
FLESH  white, when exposed turning purplish gray then blackish without an intervening reddish phase^, (Bessette), 1.5-3cm thick, white, with exposure changing to fuscous with no intermediate reddish stage, color changes sometimes slow in developing; blue discoloration sometimes developing in stem base, (Thiers(1)), turning bluish gray to purplish gray or fuscous when bruised or cut, but sometimes very slowly or erratically, (Arora)
PORES  1-3 per mm, round, "whitish, slowly becoming dingy yellow" and finally yellow-brown to olive-brown when old, not turning blue when bruised; tube layer 1-2cm thick^, (Bessette), up to 1mm, angular; white when young, olive buff to yellowish when mature; tube layer 1-2cm thick, narrowly depressed at first, becoming broadly and deeply depressed when old (somewhat ventricose), colored as pores, (Thiers(1)), not turning blue when bruised but may stain yellowish to brown, lavender, or vinaceous, (Arora)
STEM  7-12cm x 1-2cm, widening downward, often ventricose at base, solid; whitish, with brownish scabers that darken to blackish when mature; dry; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 8-13cm x 1-2cm at top, equal to club-shaped, solid; dry, ground color whitish, scabers close and pallid when young, typically becoming dark brown to black and often more widely spaced when mature, "often very fine, and sometimes more or less collapsing" when old, (Thiers(1)), rather tough and fibrous, scabers initially pallid but become reddish orange to brown and finally blackish by maturity, stem base often staining or discoloring blue, (Arora)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  reported by some authors including Bessette(3) as edible, but orange Leccinum species have been implicated in poisoning episodes
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under aspen or birch^ (Bessette), associated primarily if not exclusively with aspen (Arora), gregarious to scattered in soil under aspens, (Thiers(13)), spring, summer, and fall, (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark yellow-brown to olive-brown^ (Bessette), brown (Thiers(1))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-16 x 4-5 um, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, yellowish^; caulocystidia clavate to ventricose-mucronate, (Bessette), spores (11)13-16(18) x 4-6 um, subfusoid to subcylindric, smooth, ochraceous in Melzer's reagent, pale ochraceous in KOH, walls moderately thickened; basidia 4-spored, 29-34 x 8-12 um, clavate to pear-shaped, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia scattered to numerous, 27-43 x 7-13 um, clavate to clavate with elongated tapering apices, colorless to dark brown in KOH; cap cuticle a trichodermium of tangled hyphal tips, hyphae 4-7 um wide, walls sometimes roughened, pigment globules not developing in Melzer's reagent, "terminal cells with obtuse apices, or with tapered apices"; caulocystidia "29-39 x 10-14 um, clavate to fusoid, dark brown in KOH, thin-walled"; clamp connections absent, (Thiers(1))
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "remarkable", (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Leccinum aurantiacum has cap flesh that stains in a progression from reddish or pinkish to fuscous or blackish (Bessette). In comparison to L. aurantiacum, L. insigne is distinguished by "the characteristic color changes occurring in the flesh when exposed, the rusty red color of the pileus and the absence of pigment globules in the cuticular hyphae when mounted in Melzer's reagent", (Thiers(13)). See also SIMILAR section of Leccinum discolor.
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Bessette(3)*, Thiers(13), Arora(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Smith(35), Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Sept(1)*, AroraPocket(1)*, Marrone(1)*, McBride(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
47
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum manzanitae  Thiers^  Mycologia 63: 266-267. 1971
ENGLISH NAME(S)  madrone bolete, manzanita bolete, manzanita mushroom
NOTES  Features include 1) a reddish to brown viscid fibrillose cap, 2) a hard, tough stem with dark scabers, and 3) growth with manzanita and madrone.^ | This is one of the species that was formerly known under the name Leccinum aurantiacum. Note that Both(1) describes the staining of the flesh as changing to fuscous with red tones but neither Thiers nor Bessette nor Arora describe red tones. RANGE ^In CA it is "by far the most common Leccinum in the coastal forests of California where it occurs under manzanita and madrone" (Thiers(13) with Leccinum in italics). It also occurs in OR, (Bessette), and is reported from WA (M. Seidl, pers. comm.) and BC (O. Ceska, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains pale gray with FeSO4, tubes pale red with KOH then blackening, (Thiers)
CAP  (5)7-20(30)cm, rounded becoming convex to flat or somewhat irregular, margin with flaps of tissue when young; "dark red to reddish brown or at times rusty-brown, rusty-orange, or brown"; viscid when moist, smooth but usually with flattened fibrils, sometimes pitted when old^, (Arora), 6-20cm, cushion-shaped to convex, margin incurved at first, with flaps of sterile tissue; dark red to reddish brown, becoming darker reddish brown when old; "typically viscid, often somewhat pitted and uneven, appressed-fibrillose", (Bessette), often shallowly to deeply pitted or reticulate, viscid to subviscid, especially when old, strongly appressed-fibrillose during all stages or occasionally tomentose, never bald, fibrils often more conspicuous toward margin, (Thiers(13))
FLESH  thick, firm becoming soft; "white, usually bruising smoky-gray to purple-gray or bluish-gray when cut, but often very slowly or only in certain areas"^, (Arora), white, when exposed slowly turning fuscous without reddish phase, (Bessette), changing to fuscous with red tones when cut (Both), " 2-4cm thick, white when first exposed, slowly and erratically changing to fuscous with no reddish intermediate stage", in stem slowly staining fuscous in apical portion, sometimes turning blue in base, (Thiers(13))
PORES  "whitish to pale olive, olive-gray or grayish, usually deep dingy olive-buff in age"; not turning blue when bruised but often discoloring brown^, (Arora) 1-3 per mm, angular, pale olive-buff becoming darker olive-buff, bruising dark brown; tube layer 1-2.5cm thick, depressed near stem when old, (Bessette), up to 1mm in diameter, angular, colored as tubes, tubes layer 1-2.5cm thick, "adnate to shallowly or deeply depressed", pale olive when young, darkening to olive drab when mature, staining dark brown when bruised, (Thiers(13))
STEM  8-20cm x 1.5-4cm, equal or widening downwards, tough, fibrous, solid; whitish with pallid scabers that become deep brown to black by maturity, lower part "often bruising (or already stained) bright blue to greenish-blue"^, (Arora), 9-15cm x 1.6-4cm, widening downwards, sometimes with ventricose base; solid; whitish, with dense whitish scabers that darken to nearly fuscous when old; dry; partial veil and ring absent, (Bessette), 10-16cm x 1.5-3.5cm wide at top, "clavate to ventricose, solid"; ground color whitish, "scales typically pallid when young" darkening to near fuscous when old; "surface dry, conspicuously fibrillose-scaly", (Thiers(13))
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild (Thiers(13))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild (Thiers(13))
EDIBILITY  reported by some authors including Bessette(3) as edible, but orange Leccinum species have been implicated in poisoning episodes
HABITAT  singly to scattered or gregarious, under manzanita and madrone^, (Arora), single, scattered, or in groups under madrone or manzanita (Bessette), fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Arora, Bessette), cinnamon-brown (Thiers(13))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-19 x 3-5 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth^, (Arora), spores 13-17 x 4-6 um, fusoid to subcylindric [almost cylindric], smooth, ochraceous, (Bessette), spores 13-17 x 4-5.5 um, (var. angustisporum distinguished only by spores that reach only 3-4 um wide and often average 1-2 um longer), fusoid to subelliptic to subcylindric, inequilateral, smooth, moderately thick-walled; basidia 4-spored, 27-32 x 6-9 um, clavate to pyriform; hymenial cystidia often obscure, scattered, 23-32 x 4-6 um, fusoid to clavate with narrow elongated apices, colorless in KOH; cap cuticle a trichodermium of free tangled hyphal tips, hyphae 8-12 um wide, some disarticulation of cells, walls smooth to sometimes obscurely rough, pigment globules forming in cap cuticle hyphae when mounted in Melzer's, terminal cells elongated and often noticeably tapered; clamp connections absent, (Thiers(1))
NAME ORIGIN  means "with manzanita"^ (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Arora and Bessette mention several other "manzanita boletes" that occur in California. Leccinum ponderosum is similar but associated with conifers: it typically has unchanging or only slightly changing flesh, and the cap is bald and not as deeply colored. A similar but (in 1971) undescribed species occurs above timberline with Arctostaphylos uva-ursi in Alaska, but L. manzanitae is "much darker colored, consistently larger in size, viscid, has different color changes in the exposed flesh and slightly smaller spores", (Thiers(13)).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Thiers(1), Thiers(13), Both(1), AroraPocket(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
48
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum ponderosum  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Mich. Bot. 5: 144-145. 1966
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) large size, 2) an orange-red cap that is bald or nearly so, 3) white unchanging cap flesh, 4) whitish to pale olive brown pores that bruise yellow-brown, 5) a stem with brown to blackish scabers that stains blue especially toward base, 6) growth under conifers, and 7) microscopic characters including orange-brown pigment globules in the cap cuticle hyphae in Melzer's reagent.^ RANGE ^Leccinum ponderosum is found in WA, OR, and ID, (Bessette). It appears on foray lists from BC.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  9-30cm, convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old; orange-red to dull brick-red; dry, bald or nearly so; margin "with thin flaps of sterile tissue at least when young"^, (Bessette), 10-30cm, ferruginous-red; soon viscid, (Smith(4)), 10-30cm, obtuse to convex when young, with appendiculate margin, expanding to broadly convex to nearly flat; ferruginous red ("Kaiser-brown" to "vinaceous-rufous" or "rufous") and when dried dull brick red; subviscid when young, more viscid when old, bald to appressed-fibrillose, (Smith(38))
FLESH  "white, not staining when exposed or bruised"^, (Bessette), white, when cut not changing appreciably, (Smith(4)), "white when cut and not changing appreciably, but as dried mostly merely buff-color throughout pileus and stipe but with a few gray streaks", (Smith(38))
PORES  2-3 per mm, round to angular; whitish at first, becoming dingy whitish to pale olive brown when old, "slowly staining yellowish to orange-brown when bruised"; tube layer 0.8-2cm thick, typically depressed near stem when old^, (Bessette), "young pores pallid to avellaneous", staining ochraceous where lightly bruised; tube layer 1-2cm thick, pallid, (Smith(4)), minute; "pallid to avellaneous when young, staining ochraceous where lightly bruised"; tube layer 1-2cm thick (in young caps), "adnate-subdecurrent, dingy clay color as dried", (Smith(38))
STEM  7-15cm x 2-3cm, widening downward, solid; "whitish, with brown to fuscous scabers, staining blue when bruised, especially toward the base"; dry; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 8-16cm x 2-3cm at top, enlarging to 5-9cm at base, solid, hard; apex pale buff, when fresh often flushed reddish like the cap, stem "where handled staining blue (entire base finally) and in drying becoming yellow to olive-yellow"; "with avellaneous to fuscous points and squamules arising from a pallid cottony rather well-developed under-layer", 'the ornamentation drying near "snuff brown" and appearing as irregular patches of appressed material', (Smith(38))
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  reported by some authors including Bessette(3) as edible, but orange Leccinum species have been implicated in poisoning episodes
HABITAT  single, scattered or in groups on or near decaying conifers, especially pines^, (Bessette), scattered under Ponderosa or Lodgepole Pine, (Smith(4)), type under Pinus ponderosa and P. lambertiana (Smith(38)), fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14-17 x 4.5-6 um, fusoid [spindle-shaped], smooth, ochraceous^, (Bessette), spores 14-17 x 4.5-6 um, hyphae of cap cuticle 4-12 um wide, in Melzer's reagent "the content rounding into distinct globules in some"; caulocystidia mostly clavate, (Smith(4)), spores 14-17 x 4.5-5.5(6) um, fusoid [spindle-shaped], smooth, tan in Melzer's reagent, ochraceous in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 18-24 x 9-12 um, often with a large colorless globule; pleurocystidia "36-45 x 8-13 um, fusoid-ventricose with neck often irregular, apices acute to subacute", content colorless or brownish, cheilocystidia 20-32 x 7-12 um, clavate to clavate-mucronate, ochraceous in KOH; caulocystidia (30)40-70 x (8)10-18 um, mostly clavate, content smoky ochraceous in KOH; cap cutis with hyphae of epicutis 4-12 um wide, "the end-cells not distinctively differentiated (at most merely somewhat cystidioid), walls smooth or very rarely minutely asperulate, cells readily disarticulating, cells mostly more than 5 times longer than wide, content brownish in KOH and pigment separating in rather indistinct globules, in Melzer's with large medium and small pigment globules red to orange-red in color"; hyphae of context near subcutis with yellow to orange content when revived in Melzer's reagent; clamp connections none, (Smith(38))
NAME ORIGIN  means "heavy, weighty"^, (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Leccinum manzanitae has flesh that is deeper in color and slowly and erratically changes to fuscous when exposed, and the cap is strongly appressed-fibrillose during all stages, (Thiers).
SOURCES  Smith(38) (colors in quotation marks from Ridgway), Bessette(3)*, Smith(4), Thiers(1), Both(1)
49
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum rotundifoliae  (Singer) A.H. Sm., Thiers, and Watling^  Mich. Bot. 6: 128-129. 1967
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a whitish to tan cap that darkens when old, 2) white flesh which when cut is unchanging or turns slightly pinkish in cap, turns brownish in top of stem, and turns greenish blue in base, 3) whitish to dingy pale brown unchanging pores, 4) a whitish to pale tan stem with scabers whitish to brownish or grayish brown, 5) growth under birch, and 6) a blue reaction of cap flesh to FeSO4.^ | The online Species Fungorum, accessed February 12, 2018, considered this taxon a synonym of Leccinum scabrum (Bull.) Gray, but MycoBank, accessed the same day, maintained them separately. RANGE ^L. rotundifoliae is found in eastern Canada south to NY, west to ID and AK, (Bessette), and including MI (Smith).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh instantly stains dark blue with the application of FeSO4, (Bessette), cap flesh blue with FeSO4, (Smith)
CAP  2-8cm, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly convex; "whitish to tan or grayish tan", darkening when old; "dry to slightly viscid, typically wrinkled and irregularly depressed"^, (Bessette), 2-6cm, obtuse to convex becoming broadly convex; "white to dull white overall at first, slowly becoming pale buff to pinkish buff then cinnamon-buff to dingy clay color"; "dry at first and unpolished, becoming somewhat viscid by maturity", rimulose [finely cracked] when old at times or on drying; margin not appendiculate, (Smith)
FLESH  "white, unchanging or slightly pinkish when exposed"; in stem white, soon greenish blue in base and brownish near the top^, (Bessette), white, showing no appreciable color change when cut; in stem white when cut but soon greenish blue in base and brownish in apex [top], (Smith)
PORES  2-3 per mm, round; whitish when young, becoming dingy pale brown when old, unchanging when bruised; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick^, (Bessette), 2-3 per mm, whitish becoming avellaneous; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, white to olive-buff, slowly becoming pale wood-brown by maturity, unchanging when cut or bruised, (Smith)
STEM  4-10cm x 0.5-1.2cm, solid; "whitish to pale tan beneath a layer of scabers that are whitish at first" and brownish to grayish brown when old; dry; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 4-10cm x 0.5-1.2cm at top, equal or nearly so, solid; white with scabers that are white and slowly become brown like cap but not blackish, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in small groups on the ground under birch^, (Bessette), scattered under dwarf birch in and along the edges of cold bogs, (Smith)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 16-23 x 5.5-8 um, narrowly fusoid [spindle-shaped] to elongate-subovate, smooth, ochraceous^; caulocystidia lemon yellow in KOH, (Bessette), spores 16-20(25) x 5.5-7.5(8) um, narrowly subfusoid to elongate-subovate, many soon becoming dextrinoid when revived in Melzer's, pale ochraceous to brownish ochraceous in KOH, wall thickened slightly, no distinct germ pore; basidia 4-spored, 23-28 x 9-13 um, colorless to yellow in KOH; pleurocystidia 28-36 x 8-14 um, more or less fusoid-ventricose, colorless or nearly so, cheilocystidia 32-60 x 8-12 um, with various shapes but mostly fusoid-ventricose, "the neck tapered and flexuous or irregular in outline, ending in an acute to subacute apex, with lemon yellow content in KOH"; cap cuticle a trichodermium "of tangled mostly thin-walled flexuous narrow hyphae with hyphal ends 3-5 um wide, subgelatinous in KOH, with yellow-brown content, often flexuous, the tips of the cells obtuse to subcapitate and merely dull yellowish to orange-buff in Melzer's"; caulocystidia lemon-yellow in KOH; clamp connections absent, (Smith) 
NAME ORIGIN  means "occurring with Betula rotundifolia (round-leaved birch)"^ (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Leccinum holopus var. holopus has a cap that is whitish to grayish when young, darkening when old and often developing a greenish or olive tinge, and cap flesh that stains slightly olive with FeSO4, as opposed to L. rotundifoliae which has white to tan or grayish tan cap that becomes pinkish buff to cinnamon-buff or darker, and cap flesh that stains instantly dark blue with FeSO4, (Bessette). Leccinum holopus var. americanum is of uncertain distribution in the Pacific Northwest and unfortunately the reaction of cap flesh to FeSO4 is not recorded; however, the caulocystidia have content that is dark yellow brown in KOH, (Smith). Leccinum scabrum is less pale with scabers on stem that are less pale, (Smith).
SOURCES  Smith(35), Bessette(3)*, Both(1)
50
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum scabrum  (Bull.) Gray^  Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl. I: 647. 1821
ENGLISH NAME(S)  common scaber-stalk, common scaberstalk, birch bolete, birch scaber-stalk, birch scaberstalk, brown birch-bolete 
NOTES  Features include 1) dingy brownish bald cap, 2) white flesh that may turn brownish, or in lower stem blue, 3) whitish pores that darken but do not turn blue, 4) whitish stem with dark brown to black scabers, and 5) growth under birch.^ | Leccinum scabrum was probably introduced with planted birches but does occur with natural birches, for example in northern ID and WA, (Trudell). |Another dingy brown birch associate is Leccinum schistophyllum Bon, described from France in 1981. We have not been able to access the original description. An internet photo by Andy Overall shows some blue staining halfway up the inside of the cut stem. According to D. Miller, pers. comm. May 10, 2021, Leccinum schistophyllum was found under Vancouver British Columbia urban birch and sequenced. RANGE ^L. scabrum has been found in eastern Canada south to GA, west to AK and CA, (Bessette), BC (Bandoni), WA and OR, (numerous observers), ID (A. Parker, pers. comm.), MI (Smith), NS (Grund), and also Europe (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle stains reddish brown with application of KOH, bluish slate with FeSO4; flesh reddish-brown with application of KOH, bluish slate with FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  4-10cm, obtuse to broadly convex; "grayish brown to yellow-brown when young", often developing olive tones when old; moist or dry, bald^, (Bessette), 4-10cm, cushion-shaped to broadly convex; "grayish brown to dull yellow-brown" and often flushed olivaceous when old; "moist to dry or when wet fairly viscid", "glabrous and often with depressions in age"; margin scarcely projecting beyond tubes, (Smith), "dull brown to grayish brown to dingy yellow-brown or tan" (but often developing olive tints when old), lacking marginal flaps of tissue, (Arora), dry to viscid, may be somewhat tomentose, may crack when old, (Trudell)
FLESH  "white, not changing or sometimes slowly brownish when exposed", in stem white, unchanging or slowly staining pinkish near stem surface or turning blue near base^, (Bessette), white, 'when cut not staining or slowly becoming slightly brownish (near "pinkish buff")', in stem white, slowly staining pinkish buff in cortex when cut, "also developing both blue and red stains in restricted areas lower down if wet", (Smith: it is not totally clear from the description whether the blue and red stains are in the stem flesh or on the surface), dull whitish or pallid becoming dingy brownish when old, not turning blue when bruised but sometimes staining slightly yellowish or ocher, (Arora)
PORES  2-3 per mm, round to irregular; whitish at first, becoming grayish to brownish when old, "not staining when bruised or slowly staining yellowish"; tube layer 0.7-1.6cm thick^, (Bessette), small; pallid then colored as tubes and either not staining when bruised or staining yellow; tubes 0.8-1.5cm thick, deeply depressed around stem, "pallid, slowly becoming wood-brown as spores mature", (Smith), "cream to pale tan or olive-buff" (Trudell)
STEM  7-14cm x 0.7-1.6cm, widening downward, solid; whitish, with dark brown to blackish scabers, sometimes with bluish green stains near base; dry^, (Bessette), 7-12(15)cm x 0.7-1.2(1.6)cm, evenly widening downward, solid; pallid ground color with scabers dark brown to blackish ("dark brown to blackish punctate to nearly reticulate or squamulose decorations"), (Smith), club-shaped, often long in relation to the diameter of the cap, (Trudell)
ODOR  mild^ (Bessette, Smith)
TASTE  mild^ (Bessette, Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, scattered or in groups on ground under hardwoods, especially birch^, (Bessette), under birch (Smith), summer and fall (Miller), common in urban and suburban settings and less so in natural habitats, (Trudell)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette), olive-buff (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 15-19 x 5-7 um, subfusiform [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, pale tawny^; cap cuticle end cells "typically uniform and parallel, not inflated and clavate to subglobose"; caulocystidia "mostly clavate with dull ochraceous content in KOH", (Bessette), spores 15-19 x 5-7 um, subfusiform, smooth, pale tawny in Melzer's reagent, when revived in KOH pale tawny singly and darker in groups, wall thickened to about 0.5 um revived in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 11-13 um wide, colorless in KOH and yellowish in Melzer's reagent; pleurocystidia none; cap cuticle "a tangled layer of floccose hyphae 6-12(15) um wide, above a subgelatinous subcutis, their content smoky ochraceous in KOH and with a grayer shadow in Melzer's but content remaining granular to homogeneous", wall at first enveloped in outer gelatinous matrix that dissolves slowly in KOH, at times a few short slightly inflated cells seen; caulocystidia mostly clavate, 32-46 x 9-17 um, with smoky ochraceous content in KOH, some clavate-mucronate, and a few varying to fusoid-ventricose; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'rough'
SIMILAR  Leccinum brunneum of California and probably Idaho grows with aspen, and has a dark brown cap that fades to paler brown when old and does not stain blue, whitish stem with whitish scabers that darken when old, and white flesh that stains fuscous without an intervening reddish stage, (Bessette). Leccinum alaskanum in Alaska grows with birch but has a dark brown mottled cap (Bessette). See also SIMILAR section of Leccinum rotundifoliae.
SOURCES  Smith(35), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Ammirati(1)*, Miller(14)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Bandoni(1), Breitenbach(3)*, Grund(11), AroraPocket(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Marrone(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
51
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Leccinum versipelle  (Fr.) Snell^  Lloydia 7(1): 58. 1944;  Leccinum testaceoscabrum  (Secr.) Singer
ENGLISH NAME(S)  orange birch bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a bright orange cap that fades to dull orange then pinkish tan, 2) flesh that stains reddish then purple-gray to blackish and with FeSO4 turns bright green, 3) a stem with dense black scabers when young and when old, and 4) growth under hardwoods.^ | Bessette(3) uses the name L. testaceoscabrum but notes that according to Breitenbach(3) the correct name is Leccinum versipelle (Fr.) Snell. The online Species Fungorum, accessed January 9, 2014, also uses the name Leccinum versipelle. RANGE ^The distribution is northeastern N. America west to the Pacific Northwest and to AK where it is abundant, (Bessette). There is a collection from BC determined by W. Snell at Pacific Forestry Centre (as Boletus versipellis).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh bright green with application of FeSO4 (Bessette)
CAP  4-10cm, convex, margin with tissue, at least when young; bright reddish orange then dull orange with rose tinge, fading to pinkish tan when old; dry, nearly bald^, (Bessette), 4-10cm, convex becoming broadly convex; dull orange with a tint of rose and when dried a dull "orange-cinnamon" (Ridgway color); dry and obscurely fibrillose when young, practically bald as well as subviscid when mature; margin with hanging remnants at first, (Smith)
FLESH  "white, staining reddish, then purple-gray to blackish when exposed", especially where stem meets cap^, (Bessette), firm when young; white, "when cut staining reddish and then changing to avellaneous and finally fuscous", (Smith)
PORES  2-3 per mm, round; "whitish to olive-buff or pale grayish when young", becoming dingy brown when old, bruising olive to olive-brown or darker; tube layer 0.8-1.6cm thick, depressed near stem when old^, (Bessette), olive-pallid before dingy brown, "when lightly bruised staining olive, if severely bruised changing to fuscous"; tube layer 1.5cm thick, depressed around stem, whitish then olivaceous-pallid, (Smith)
STEM  5-12cm x 1-1.6cm, nearly equal, solid; with dense layer of black scabers when young and when mature, on a whitish ground, sometimes with bluish stains near base; dry; partial veil and ring absent^, (Bessette), 5-10cm x 1-1.5cm, equal or nearly so; pallid to white ground color, scabers typically blackish in buttons, with slight flush of reddish around the dark squamules, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
EDIBILITY  suspected to cause gastric distress in some people, (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups under beech, oak, or birch, July to September^, (Bessette), summer, fall, (Bacon)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-18 x 3.5-5 um, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped] to elongate subelliptic, smooth, ochraceous^; caulocystidia "clavate, clavate-mucronate or sometimes fusoid-ventricose with pale fuscous content in KOH", (Bessette), spores (12)13-16(18) x 3.5-4.5 um, subfusoid to elongate-subelliptic, smooth, ochraceous in KOH or Melzer's, wall -0.5 um thick; basidia 4-spored 22-30 x 9-11 um, clavate, colorless; pleurocystidia 33-45 x 9-14 um, fusoid-ventricose with subacute apex, walls thin and colorless, content in KOH colorless to brownish, in Melzer's dark brown, cheilocystidia similar but smaller and many basidiole-like cells also present; cap cuticle of appressed hyphae 6-15(18) um wide, walls thin and often minutely roughened with colorless plates, cells readily disarticulating, mostly more than 5 times as long as broad, some short cells more or less oval in outline also present, end-cells ventricose to bullet-shaped, content of cells "slowly forming irregular pigment masses and finally globules 3-10 um in diameter in Melzer's"; caulocystidia 40-80 x10-18 um, clavate, clavate-mucronate or fusoid-ventricose, content pale fuscous in KOH or some pigment also in wall; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  "versipelle" means "with a different skin or pellicle", (Both(1)); "testaceoscabrum" means "brick-red and scabrous"^ (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Leccinum atrostipitatum has a generally duller cap that is more scaly when old, paler pores when young, flesh that stains bluish gray with FeSO4, and different caulocystidia, (Bessette). L. atrostipitatum is more definitely associated with birch, the cap has a more patchy appearance at maturity, and "caulocystidia more frequently are fusoid-ventricose with elongated necks"; in one collection at least, the intermediate staining phase of the flesh was redder in L. versipelle, (Smith, discussing L. testaceoscabrum).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as L. testaceoscabrum), Smith(35) (as L. testaceoscabrum), Sept(1)* (as L. testaceoscabrum), Breitenbach(3)*, Both(1), Bacon(1)*, AroraPocket(1)* (as L. testaceoscabrum), Buczacki(1)* 
52
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Neoboletus 'luridiformis'  (Rostk.) Gelardi, Simonini & Vizzini^  Index Fungorum 192: 1, 2014;  Boletus luridiformis  Rostk.  Consp. Fung. Esc. p.24. 1821 (misapplied name);  Sutorius luridiformis (Rostk.) G. Wu & Zhu L. Yang  in Wu, Li, Zhu, Zhao, Han, Cui, Li, Xu & Yang, Fungal Diversity 81: 145. 2016  (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  slender red-pored bolete, red-stalked bolete, scarletina bolete
NOTES  {See also Red-pored Boletus Table.} This name probably represents two species in the Pacific Northwest, neither of which are described yet (N. Siegel, pers. comm.). Features include dark brown cap, bright red to orange pores, and granular rather than reticulate [netted] stem that is not bulbous.^ | The current name of the species in Europe in the Index Fungorum and MycoBank, each accessed February 9, 2019, is given as Sutorius luridiformis (Rostk.) G. Wu & Zhu L. Yang, but the need to use that genus name is disputed. RANGE ^Neoboletus 'luridiformis' is found in northeastern North America west to CA, north to AK, (Bessette), OR (vouchered at University of Washington), and WA (Buck McAdoo, pers. comm. from H. Thiers). It has been reported from BC (C. Roberts, pers. comm.), and from NS (Grund). The accompanying photographs are from the Pacific Northwest and are not the true Neoboletus luridiformis.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface red with KOH but quickly darkening, flesh yellow to pale orange with KOH, (Thiers), cap surface dark amber with application of KOH and dark olive-green with FeSO4, flesh slowly olivaceous with application of FeSO4, blued surface bleached yellow then white with KOH, (Bessette)
CAP  5-12cm, convex becoming broadly convex when old; "dark brown to nearly blackish brown when young, becoming reddish brown to olive-brown" when mature; dry, somewhat tomentose to nearly smooth^, (Bessette), 8-15cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat to occasionally umbonate or shallowly depressed when old, margin incurved to downcurved; brown when young, when old red on disc and reddish brown toward margin; dry, smooth to occasionally wrinkled to reticulate on disc, obscurely tomentose to velvety to occasionally appressed-fibrillose when young, frequently bald when old, "usually darkening and appearing water-soaked when bruised", (Thiers), 5-15(20)cm, may be pitted when old, (Arora)
FLESH  greenish yellow to yellow, quickly staining blue when cut, in stem yellow except reddish at base, rapidly turning blue when exposed^, (Bessette), 1-3cm thick, firm, compact; yellow, turning blue when bruised, in stem yellow except reddish to reddish vinaceous at base, turning blue when exposed, (Thiers)
PORES  1-3 per mm, round to irregular; "orange-red to dull orange, sometimes yellow when very young, staining blue when bruised"; tubes 0.8-1.4cm long^, (Bessette), 1-2 per mm, angular; typically red, sometimes near reddish orange, turning blue when bruised; tubes 1-2cm long, depressed around stem, yellow, turning blue when bruised, (Thiers), "red to brick-red to orange-red, orange, rusty-orange, or burnt sienna (but sometimes yellowish in old age), blueing quickly when bruised", (Arora)
STEM  6-10cm x 1.3-5cm, nearly equal or widening or narrowing downward, solid; "with reddish to orange-cinnamon pruina on a yellow ground color, often reddish at the base, blueing when bruised"; dry, not reticulate, lacking reddish hairs at base^, (Bessette), 8-12cm x 1.5-3.5(6)cm, club-shaped to somewhat club-shaped to occasionally equal, solid; typically yellow at top, usually with yellow background for entire length but marked with red granules, basal part often appearing reddish brown; dry, bald to more commonly punctate to obscurely velvety or fibrillose, not reticulate, white rhizomorphs attached to base, (Thiers), 4-15cm x (1.5)2-4(5)cm, often curved, (Arora)
ODOR  not distinctive (Bessette), often pungent, unpleasant, (Thiers)
TASTE  not distinctive (Bessette), often pungent, unpleasant, (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  poisonous, causing gastrointestinal distress (Bessette)^, rated edible by some, but red pores serve as a warning of poisonous species, (Thiers), poisonous to some people (Arora)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups under conifers or hardwoods^, (Bessette), single in soil in mixed forests (Thiers), late summer to fall (Bacon)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown (Bessette), ochraceous brown (Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-16 x 4.8-5.5 um, subcylindric to subfusoid [somewhat cylindric to somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, dark ochraceous in Melzer's, ochraceous in KOH, moderately thick-walled^; basidia 4-spored, 18-24 x 7-10 um, colorless, contents granular in KOH; hymenial cystidia scattered to numerous, sometimes embedded, 39-45 x 9-11 um, "subclavate with tapering apices to basidioid, often heavily incrusted and staining bright ochraceous in KOH", occasionally colorless and apparently not incrusted; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores 12-16 x 4.5-6 um, subfusoid, smooth, ochraceous, (Bessette)
NAME ORIGIN  probably 'in the form of [Boletus] luridus'
SIMILAR  Rubroboletus pulcherrimus and Rubroboletus eastwoodiae have a reticulate [netted] stem, (Thiers). Suillellus amygdalinus is much paler, with a more pallid stem and broader spores, (Thiers). S. amygdalinus has a dark rose-red to ocher-red cap that becomes brownish red to pale brown with reddish tints when old, a yellow stem with cinnamon-red to brick-red granules, and wider spores with thick walls, (Bessette). S. amygdalinus has oranger pores and grows under hardwoods, (Arora).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus luridiformis), Thiers(1) (as B. erythropus), Arora(1)* (as B. erythropus), Grund(11) (as B. erythropus), Bacon(1)* (as Boletus luridiformis), AroraPocket(1)* (as B. erythropus), Buczacki(1)* (as Boletus luridiformis), Marrone(1)* (as Boletus 'luridiformis')
53
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Phylloporus arenicola  A.H. Sm. and Trappe^  Mycologia 64: 1150-1151. 1972
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include olive to olive-fuscous cap, pallid to yellowish flesh without blue-staining, adnexed-seceding bright yellow gills, stem with dull yellow ground color (bright yellow near base), overlaid with brown to reddish pruina, growth on sand dunes, and elongated spores.^ | A.H. Smith and J.M. Trappe lists the outstanding features in the original description as "the immediate NH4OH reaction to violet-fuscous of the cuticle of the pileus when fresh, the olive to olive-fuscous color of the pileus, the lack of any blue stain when the hymenophore or context are injured, the adnexed to emarginate-seceding lamellae, and the bright yellow base of the stipe". They go on to say that the common Phylloporus rhodoxanthus "is readily distinguished by a number of characters such as the gills being decurrent, by the ammonia reaction, and the dull red to bay colored pileus". (Smith(10)). Nevertheless, there are observers who say that many collections otherwise fitting Phylloporus arenicola do stain blue, and DNA sequences thus far in California and the Pacific Northwest match Phylloporus arenicola. RANGE ^Phylloporus arenicola is found at least in OR, (Smith), also CA (Bessette), and WA (vouchered at University of Washington).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^NH4OH applied to cuticle immediately produces a violaceous-fuscous stain that soon becomes mahogany red; FeSO4 slowly weakly olive (Smith)
CAP  1.5-4.5cm across, flat becoming convex-depressed; moderate olive on the margin to olive-fuscous on the disc, when old more olive-brown, in fading becoming olive-yellow and possessing a sheen; unpolished to velvety^, (Smith), 1.5-4.5cm across, convex becoming nearly flat to somewhat depressed, "margin even incurved at first"; "dull olive with a darker olive-fuscous disc when young, becoming olive-brown" then fading to olive-ocher or dull pale brown when old; dry, velvety subtomentose, sometimes with a sheen, (Bessette)
FLESH  pallid to yellowish, not staining blue when cut^, (Smith), whitish to yellowish, unchanging when exposed; in stem bright yellow to cinnabar toward base and pale yellow in upper part, (Bessette)
PORES  adnexed-seceding, subdistant, broad; bright yellow ("mustard yellow"), not staining, edges colored as faces; edges even^, (Smith), adnexed-seceding to subdecurrent, strongly lamellate [in the form of gills], 0.3-0.7cm broad; bright yellow when young, becoming somewhat duller yellow when old, not staining when bruised, (Bessette)
STEM  4-6cm x 0.6-0.8cm, narrowing downward; dull yellow ground color overlaid with brown to reddish pruina, bright yellow in and around the base or in some becoming cinnabar toned^, (Smith), 4-6cm x 0.5-0.8cm, narrowing downward, solid; "with a dull yellow ground color that is partially covered with brown to reddish pruina and fibrils"; dry, (Bessette)
ODOR  none^ (Smith)
TASTE  mild^ (Smith)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  type single under Pinus contorta on sand dunes^, (Smith), single, scattered, or in groups on sand dunes under pine, September to November, (Bessette), fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-12 x 4-5 um, subelliptic to subfusoid, smooth, weakly dextrinoid, apex lacking a distinct germ pore, olive-hyaline in KOH^; basidia 4-spored, 38-60 x 9-13 um, clavate, with oil droplets, pale yellow in Melzer's reagent; pleurocystidia subfusoid to fusoid-ventricose, 52-86 x 9-16 um, thin-walled, smooth, colorless, not distinctive, cheilocystidia similar to pleurocystidia but shorter; no clamp connections, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'living in sand'
SIMILAR  Phylloporus rhodoxanthus has a dull red to bay colored cap, decurrent gills, and different ammonia reaction, (Smith(10)). Phylloporus boletinoides A.H. Sm. & Thiers, found in eastern North America, "has a strongly decurrent boletinoid to sublamellate pore surface that sometimes stains dark blue to bluish green when bruised", (Bessette(3)). Xerocomus subtomentosus group has somewhat similar cap but has pores not gills.
SOURCES  Smith(10), Bessette(3)*, Desjardin(6)*
54
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Phylloporus rhodoxanthus  (Schwein.) Bres.^  Fung. trident. 2(14): 95. 1900
ENGLISH NAME(S)  gilled bolete
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Most or all of the observations of this species on the west coast of North America are Phylloporus arenicola. Features are dry minutely velvety brown to reddish cap that looks like a Boletus, and thick yellow gills.^ | The subspecies is not specified for the Arora description below (note that he says the gills typically bruise green or blue but sometimes not at all), but Bessette's description is for ssp. americanus Singer (without that color change). Ssp. foliiporus (Murrill) Singer has a bright yellow gill-like surface that stains bluish to greenish when bruised and a cinnamon to dark pinkish brown cap and according to Both(1) is recorded from Florida north to New Jersey. (Incidentally Both(1) says that the photo in Phillips(1) p. 127 of P. foliiporus is P. boletinoides). P. rhodoxanthus ssp. albomycelinus Snell and Dick from eastern North America (with white basal mycelium) has been renamed P. leucomycelinus Singer. RANGE ^P. rhodoxanthus is reported from WA by O'Dell, and is not uncommon on foray lists in BC (often blue-staining), with collections at the Pacific Forestry Centre and the University of British Columbia, and there are collections from WA at the University of Washington. Bessette gives RANGE of ssp. americanus as eastern Canada south to FL, west to CA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle stains blue with NH4OH (Bessette)
CAP  2-5(12)cm, broadly convex to flat or with uplifted margin when old; "dull brown to olive-brown or yellow-brown in one form, red to reddish-brown in another", "sometimes developing pallid to yellowish cracks or fissures"; surface "dry, minutely velvety to nearly smooth"^, (Arora), 2.5-10cm, obtuse to convex at first, becoming nearly flat and sometimes shallowly depressed; "color variable, dark red, dull red, reddish yellow to reddish brown or olive brown"; dry, somewhat velvety, often cracked to cracked-areolate [cracked like dried mud] when old; margin typically with narrow band of sterile tissue, (Bessette)
FLESH  thick; pallid to yellowish^, (Arora), whitish to pale yellow, tinged reddish under cap surface, (Bessette)
PORES  gill-like structures adnate to decurrent but sometimes seceding, widely spaced, broad, fairly thick, sometimes forked or with cross veins; "bright yellow to ocher, typically bruising green or blue (but often slowly, sometimes not at all), sometimes also staining brownish"^, (Arora), with strong gill-like structures, sometimes pore-like near stem, decurrent, subdistant to distant, sometimes forked, strongly interveined, separating cleanly from cap; bright yellow at first, becoming yellow to golden yellow and finally ocher when old, not turning blue when bruised, (Bessette)
STEM  3-10cm x 0.4-1(1.5)cm, equal or narrowing downward, solid, "yellow to dingy yellowish-buff or reddish", often stained dingy brown or reddish-brown in lower part; smooth, dry^, (Arora), 3-9cm x 0.5-1.3cm, nearly equal or ventricose at base; yellow with reddish tinges; often with distinct ribs near top, "scurfy or punctate with small reddish brown dots and points"; with yellow basal mycelium, (Bessette)
ODOR  not distinctive ^(Arora), not distinctive (Bessette)
TASTE  not distinctive^, (Arora), not distinctive (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  yes (Arora)^, yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  single to widely scattered or in small groups (usually 2s or 3s) on ground in woods^, (Arora), scattered or in groups on the ground in hardwood forests under beech and oak, (Bessette), spring, summer, and fall, (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown to yellowish-tinged or olive-tinged^ (Arora), yellowish ochraceous (Bessette), orange-brown to yellowish brown (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-15 x 3-6 um, narrowly elliptic to spindle-shaped, smooth^ (Arora), spores 8-14 x 3-5 um, elliptic to fusoid, smooth, pale yellowish (Bessette)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'red-yellow'
SIMILAR  Phylloporus arenicola has an olive-brown to olive-ocher cap and adnexed to subdecurrent gills that do not stain blue when bruised, and immediate ammonia reaction to violaceous-fuscous then quickly mahogany red, (Bessette(3), but see NOTES under that species with regard to blue-staining). Phylloporus boletinoides A.H. Sm. & Thiers, found in eastern North America, "has a strongly decurrent boletinoid to sublamellate pore surface that sometimes stains dark blue to bluish green when bruised", (Bessette(3)).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Kibby(1)*, Barron(1)*, O'Dell(1), Both(1)
55
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Porphyrellus porphyrosporus  (Fr.) E.-J. Gilbert^  Skrifter udgivet af Videskabsselskabet i Christiania: 99. 1931;  Porphyrellus pseudoscaber  (Secr.) Singer;  Tylopilus pseudoscaber  (Secr.) A.H. Sm. and Thiers;  Boletus pseudoscaber  Secr.;  Tylopilus pacificus Wolfe, Biblthca Mycol. 69: 44 (1980) [1979] ?;  Porphyrellus pacificus (Wolfe) Singer, J. Garcia & L.D. Gomez  ?
ENGLISH NAME(S)  dark bolete, dusky bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry, velvety cap that is dark brown to olive-brown or dark vinaceous brown, 2) white flesh that turns blue then reddish brown when exposed, 3) pores that are brown when young, 4) tubes that become blue when bruised or exposed, and 5) cap-colored stem that may be reticulate.^ | Not all authors accept the synonymy used here. Differing species concepts may be involved as Singer (according to Bessette et al.) described Tylopilus porphyrosporus as a medium to large bolete growing at lower elevations in hardwood forests and mixed woods and having flesh that stains blue when exposed, and Tylopilus pseudoscaber as a small to medium bolete that grows at higher elevations in conifer woods and with flesh that does not stain blue when exposed (but in another source states slight blueing has occasionally been observed in T. pseudoscaber), (Bessette). Smith(35) on the other hand distinguishes T. porphyrosporus with pores pallid to grayish when young and flesh slowly becoming fuscous when cut from T. pseudoscaber with pores coffee brown when young and flesh staining blue then reddish when cut (while noting that the Fries species concept Boletus porphyrosporus that they are using does have flesh that turns blue). Tylopilus pacificus was originally described from Washington and is often regarded as a synonym too. Tylopilus olivaceobrunneus was originally described from Oregon (see under SIMILAR for different ideas about its status). By 2018 an attempt was being made to study these similar taxa and determine the status of entities on the west coast of North America. RANGE ^Porphyrellus porphyrosporus is found from eastern North America to the Pacific Northwest (Bessette), including MI (Smith(35), who is describing Pacific Northwest material), CA (Thiers, Phillips), and NS (Grund). It is found in WA (Trudell(1)). There are Paul Kroeger collections from BC labeled Tylopilus pseudoscaber at the University of British Columbia. According to D. Miller, pers. comm., more than a dozen ITS sequences in GenBank match each other, and these match a sequence from an OR collection.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle stains mahogany-red with application of KOH and negative with FeSO4, flesh stains dull orange with application of KOH, green with FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  5-15cm, convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; "dark brown to olive-brown, or dark vinaceous brown"; dry subtomentose [somewhat tomentose], sometimes finely areolate [cracked like dried mud] to conspicuously cracked when old^, (Bessette), 5.5-15cm, convex becoming flat-convex to nearly flat; "very dark earth-brown to olive-brown or dark vinaceous-brown"; dry, dull subtomentose, plush-like, "often appearing innately fibrillose when older, occasionally conspicuously finely areolate and rarely fibrillose-scaly", (Smith(35))
FLESH  white, turning blue when exposed, sometimes slowly, "then staining reddish brown and finally grayish brown to grayish black"^, (Bessette), 1-3cm thick at disc, soft, spongy; "white, turning to bright blue when cut and then in a few minutes reddish brown, finally dull brown", in stem whitish and not changing color readily, (Smith(35))
PORES  2-3 per mm, round; "dark reddish brown to dark brown or blackish brown", turning dark greenish blue then reddish brown to dark grayish brown when bruised; tube layer 1.3-2cm thick, depressed near stem when old, turning blue when bruised^, (Bessette), small, round, dark yellow-brown (also described as coffee brown and with the Ridgway color "bister") when young, not stuffed; tube layer 1.5-2cm thick, "subdecurrent to shallowly depressed when young", becoming broadly and deeply depressed when old, pale grayish brown, occasionally grayish to pallid when older, "becoming greenish blue when bruised or exposed", (Smith(35))
STEM  4-12cm x 1-3cm, widening downward or nearly equal, solid; colored like cap, often with whitish base; dry, scurfy-punctate, with or without reticulation^, (Bessette), 4-10(12)cm x 1-3cm at top, equal to somewhat ventricose [wider in middle] to clavate [wider in lower part], solid-stuffed; colored as cap, often becoming black at base when old; dry, dull, evenly and minutely furfuraceous, "sometimes conspicuously ridged with long close lines with anastomoses, others only slightly reticulate and some not at all so", (Smith(35))
ODOR  pungent, clove-like or resembling coal tar when fresh, stem base sometimes with a strong odor of chlorine, (Bessette), sharp and rather pungent, strong, (Smith(35)), antiseptic-like (Miller)
TASTE  weakly bitter or mild^ (Bessette), mild (Smith(35)), bitter with an aftertaste (Miller)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or rarely in groups on ground "in mixed woods or conifer woods, sometimes growing on well-decayed logs and stumps"^, (Bessette), scattered to gregarious in hardwood and mixed forests along old roads, etc., (Smith(35)), summer and early fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark reddish brown^, (Bessette), distinctly reddish brown when moist, dark grayish brown when air-dried, (Smith(35))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-18 x 6-7.5 um, elliptic, smooth, pale brown^, (Bessette), spores (12)14-18 x 6-7.5 um, (occasional giant spores up to 27 um long), narrowly elliptic, smooth, somewhat dextrinoid (tawny or more reddish) in Melzer's reagent, pale earth-brown in KOH, lacking apical pore; basidia 4-spored, 45-50 x 9-15 um, smoky brown in KOH, yellowish in Melzer's reagent; pleurocystidia scattered, 50-65 x 10-16 um, clavate-mucronate to fusoid-ventricose, usually with dark brown content when fresh, cheilocystidia similar to pleurocystidia or up to 30 um wide in enlarged part, brown when fresh; cap cuticle "a collapsed trichodermium, the hyphae with elliptic to subclavate end-cells with the tips tapered to an acute to subacute apex", walls thin and nearly colorless, "the cells back from the terminal cell often curved, of equal diameter, merely yellowish in Melzer's", the content of the hyphae colorless to yellowish in Melzer's, no amyloid particles present in most fruitbodies in the cuticular hyphae; clamp connections absent, (Smith(35))
NAME ORIGIN  porphyr- refers to a purple or dark red color
SIMILAR  Tylopilus olivaceobrunneus (Zeller & Bailey) A.H. Sm. (== Boletus olivaceobrunneus Zeller & Bailey, == Tylopilus porphyrosporus var. olivaceobrunneus (Zeller & F.D. Bailey) Wolfe) was considered a distinct species by Smith(8) and Smith(4), but as a synonym of Tylopilus pseudoscaber (Secretan) A. H. Smith and Thiers by Thiers(1), and Ammirati(1). In the online Species Fungorum, accessed October 23, 2018, it is listed as a synonym of Boletus edulis, but it is possible that different concepts are involved (further discussed in Both(1)). The taxon is said to grow on the ground under Douglas-fir in Oregon and Washington, with an olive-brown to blackish brown cap that stains darker when bruised, dull white flesh that does not stain blue when exposed, a brown pore surface that does not stain blue when exposed, a pale brown stem that is reticulated on the upper part, and spores that measure 13-16 x 5-6 um, (according to Bessette), with stem reticulate in upper half (as opposed to Porphyrellus porphyrosporus with non-reticulate stem) and growing under Sitka spruce (according to both Smith(4) and Smith(8)).
SOURCES  Smith(35) (as T. pseudoscaber), Bessette(3)* (as T. pseudoscaber), Thiers(1) (as T. pseudoscaber), Phillips(1)* (as T. pseudoscaber), Miller(14)* (as Tylopilus pseudoscaber), Arora(1)* (as T. pseudoscaber), Lincoff(2)* (as T. pseudoscaber), Lincoff(1)* (as Porphyrellus pseudoscaber), Ammirati(1)* (as T. pseudoscaber), Trudell(1), Trudell(4)*, Grund(11) (as T. pseudoscaber), Smith(4), Smith(8), Siegel(2)*, Buczacki(1)*, Both(1) (discussing Boletus olivaceobrunneus)
56
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Pulveroboletus ravenelii  (Berk. & M.A. Curtis) Murrill^  Mycologia 1: 9. 1909;  Boletus ravenelii  Berk. & M.A. Curtis
ENGLISH NAME(S)  powdery sulfur bolete, veiled sulfur bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a bright yellow powdery veil that covers the fruitbody at first, 2) the cap becoming orange-red to brownish red from the center outward, 3) the veil breaking to leave hanging veil remnants and an annulus, 4) the cap flesh turning blue when injured, 5) the pore surface bright yellow becoming dingy yellow to grayish brown, staining blue, then grayish brown when bruised, and 6) the stem bright yellow.^ RANGE ^Pulveroboletus ravenelii is found in OR but rare (collection at the University of Washington which also has collections from MS and TX), rare in CA (Del Norte and Mendocino Counties, Thiers), widely distributed from eastern Canada south to the Gulf of Mexico, west to TX, MI, and CA, and most abundant in the southeastern United States, (Smith). Oregon State University has collections from China and Japan.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  1-10cm, blunted rounded to convex, becoming nearly flat when old; bright sulfur yellow, becoming orange-red to brownish red from the center outward; dry and pulverulent [powdery] at first, becoming appressed-fibrillose to fibrillose-scaly, often slightly wrinkled or rimose [cracked] when old; margin typically with hanging veil remnants^, (Bessette), (1)2-6(10)cm, obtuse to convex to flat-convex to nearly flat; bright sulfur yellow overall, disc becoming orange-red to brownish red as pulverulence disappears; dry and pulverulent [powdery] or at times (when wet) somewhat tacky to viscid, when pulverulence disappears becoming felty-fibrillose, (Smith), background typically pinkish to orange brown or as pale as buff, with fibrils or streaks of reddish brown, veil elements intense yellow either unchanging or becoming paler yellow; surface viscid to subviscid but typically overlain with dry veil, tomentose to pulverulent due to veil layer, bald to appressed fibrillose when veil disappears, sometimes appearing fibrillose-scaly or eventually rimose-areolate [cracked like dried mud] when very old, margin often appendiculate with veil remnants, (Thiers)
FLESH  "white to pale yellow, slowly staining pale blue, then dingy yellow to pale brown when cut"^, (Bessette), about 1cm thick, floccose; "whitish to yellow, changing slowly to light blue and then drab-brown or dull yellowish where injured"; in stem whitish or soon pale yellowish and developing a pink tinge where bruised, (Smith), whitish to pale yellow, slowly changing to blue when exposed, sometimes becoming brown or yellow when exposed; in stem pale ochraceous to whitish except intensely yellow in base, unchanging or developing pinkish tinge when exposed, (Thiers)
PORES  1-3 per mm, angular to nearly circular; bright yellow, becoming dingy yellow to grayish brown when mature, "staining greenish blue, then grayish brown when bruised"; tube layer 0.5-0.8cm thick^, (Bessette), 2-3 per mm, round or nearly so to angular; bright yellow when undamaged; tube layer 0.5-0.8cm thick, adnate, sometimes becoming slightly depressed around stem, soon primuline-yellow to lemon-yellow or more olive-tinted, changing to greenish blue then dusky brown and finally black when bruised, (Smith)
STEM  4-14.5cm x 0.6-1.6cm, equal or widening downward, solid; bright sulfur-yellow, bright yellow and smooth above the annulus; sheathed from the base upward with tiny appressed fibrils; "partial veil membranous and powdery, bright sulfur-yellow, typically leaving a prominent, but sometimes inconspicuous superior annulus"^, (Bessette), 4-9(15)cm x 0.4-1.2(1.6)cm, equal or narrowing upward toward top or sometimes variously irregular in shape, solid; "covered at least over the lower part with yellow pulverulence from a dry veil", the veil rarely leaving a faint annulus, surface brilliant yellow; dry to moist; with yellowish to white rhizomorphs around the base, (Smith), universal veil leaving yellow powder on cap and stem, partial veil yellow, leaving fragile ring on stem or fragments about cap margin, (Lincoff), sometimes appearing somewhat annulate (Thiers)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), slight (Smith), pleasant (Miller)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), acidulous (Smith), rather sour (Phillips), mild but soon unpleasant (Miller)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups on ground in woods^, (Bessette), mostly single to scattered in pine woods as well as hardwoods, (Smith), on the ground, in mixed pine, hemlock, and deciduous stands, spruce woods, and laurel and rhododendron thickets, (Lincoff), in mixed forests, most commonly under oaks (Thiers for California), summer, fall, and winter, (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive gray to olive brown^, (Bessette), smoky olive (Smith from Coker & Beers), dark olive brown (Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-10.5 x 4-5 um, elliptic to oval, smooth, pale brown^, (Bessette), spores 8-10.5 x 4-5 um, ventricose to more or less ovate, smooth, colorless outer sheath inconspicuous, in Melzer's reagent pale rusty brown, in KOH dingy ochraceous-tawny; basidia 4-spored, 24-36 x 10-14 um, pale lemon-yellow in KOH, not as bright in Melzer's reagent; pleurocystidia "scattered, 30-46 x 7-12 um, sometimes inconspicuous, fusoid-ventricose", colorless to lemon-yellow in KOH, smooth, thin-walled, cheilocystidia basidium-like or similar to pleurocystidia; cap cuticle a tangled mass of narrow (2.5-6 um wide) curved hyphae yellow to colorless in KOH and reddish brown in Melzer's reagent, no gelatinizing elements even when young; clamp connections absent, (Smith), spores 8-12 x 4-6.5 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth, (Arora), veil tissue composed of narrow, loosely interwoven hyphae staining yellow in KOH, no sphaerocysts apparent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  named for mycologist H.W. Ravenel (1814-1887)
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Smith(35), Bessette(3)*, Thiers(1), Lincoff(2)*, Miller(14)*, Phillips(1)*, Arora(1), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
57
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Rubroboletus eastwoodiae  (Murrill) Vasquez, Simonini, Svetash., Miksik & Vizzini^  in Tibpromma et al., Fungal Diversity 83: 200. 2017;  Rubroboletus eastwoodiae  (Murrill) D. Arora, C. F. Schwarz & J.L. Frank  in Frank, Index Fungorum 248: 1. 2015 (invalid new name);  Boletus eastwoodiae  (Murrill) Sacc. & Trotter  Syll. fung. (Abellini) 21: 237. 1912;  Suillellus eastwoodiae  Murrill  N. Amer. Fl. (New York) 9(3): 152. 1910;  Boletus satanas  Lenz (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  Alice Eastwood's Boletus
NOTES  {See also Red-pored Boletus Table.} Rubroboletus eastwoodiae is recognized by red pores, a light gray to olive-buff cap with pink flushes, and an abruptly bulbous reticulate stem.^ |This taxon has been known as Boletus satanas Lenz in California and the Pacific Northwest. Thiers and Halling in 1976 examined the type of Boletus eastwoodiae (Murrill) Sacc. & Trotter and found it to be Boletus satanas: what had passed in California under the name Boletus eastwoodiae was renamed Boletus pulcherrimus Thiers and Halling, (Both(1)). However, European material of Boletus satanas has a different coloration of the cap and lacks the abruptly bulbous base (the separation of the two should be established by molecular methods). |To summarize the confusing issue, Boletus eastwoodiae was the name for what used to be called Boletus satanas, and Boletus pulcherrimus the name for what used to be called Boletus eastwoodiae! Boletus eastwoodiae then became Rubroboletus eastwoodiae and Boletus pulcherrimus became Rubroboletus pulcherrimus. |The proposed new name, Rubroboletus eastwoodiae (Murrill) D. Arora, C.F. Schwarz & J.L. Frank, was considered invalid because the type of the name is not indicated properly. Index Fungorum no. 248 indicated the Basionym as Boletus eastwoodiae (Murrill) Sacc. & Trotter, when it should have been Suillellus eastwoodiae Murrill. In 2017 the name was published validly by other authors. RANGE ^This taxon is found in CA (Bessette), rare in OR (vouchered at Oregon State University), and rare in WA (recorded by Michael Beug, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  7-30cm, convex to broadly convex or nearly flat when old; "pallid to gray or olive-buff", becoming suffused with pink when old, especially toward margin; "dry, smooth or sometimes cracked"^, (Arora), 10-20cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat-convex when old, typically massive in appearance; pale gray with pink blushes, younger caps often predominantly gray with only traces of pink, but in older caps pink shades typically predominate, especially near margin, but in some very old caps, the pink is absent and the cap near olive-gray; dry, unpolished, bald to obscurely fibrillose to occasionally fibrillose-scaly, unchanging or often becoming diffracted to rimose-areolate [cracked like dried mud] on disc, or becoming obscurely scaly on disc and finely velvety to subtomentose to bald toward margin, (Thiers(1)), grayish with pink tones when young, becoming pale olive-buff to pale olive-gray and developing stronger pink tones, especially along margin when old; dry, bald, often rimose when old, (Bessette)
FLESH  white to yellow, turning blue when bruised, especially when young or near tubes^, (Arora), 2-5cm thick, yellow, turning blue readily on exposure when young, sometimes erratically when older; in stem colored the same, turning blue when exposed except in basal part, (Thiers(1))
PORES  deep red becoming red to pink or when old orange to yellowish, "turning blue to blue-black when bruised; tubes yellow to greenish"^, (Arora), very small, up to 2 per mm, when young reddish brown, when older often fading to red, turning blue when bruised; tube layer 1-2cm thick, arcuate-decurrent to subdecurrent when young, becoming deeply to shallowly depressed when old, yellow, turning blue when exposed or bruised, (Thiers(1)), about 2 per mm, reddish brown when very young, becoming red, then fading to reddish orange to orange-yellow when old, turning blue when bruised, (Bessette), pores slightly irregular (Lincoff)
STEM  6-15cm x 2-6cm at top, with massive abrupt bulb at base up to 15cm wide and especially prominent when young, solid, firm; upper part colored more or less as cap, bulb usually pink or pinkish red, but pink tones usually more evident when young and tending to disappear when old; upper part finely but distinctly reticulate (reticulation usually reddish)^, (Arora), 6-12cm x 3.5-7cm at top, abruptly bulbous, bulb 9-14cm wide, stem solid; color similar to cap, bulb often pinkish vinaceous; dry, conspicuously reticulate over upper part or entire surface, the reticulation pink to vinaceous, bald to obscurely tomentose over non-reticulate part, sometimes streaked and appearing appressed-fibrillose, (Thiers(1)), abruptly bulbous with ventricose base, pinkish when young, becoming grayish with pinkish tints when mature, covered with pinkish to pinkish vinaceous reticulation on upper part or sometimes nearly overall; partial veil absent, (Bessette)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Thiers(1)), cabbage or dung when mature (Lincoff)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Thiers(1))
EDIBILITY  poisonous, at least raw, causing vomiting, diarrhea, and severe cramps, (Arora)
HABITAT  single or in groups under oaks^, (Arora), single to gregarious under oaks, (Thiers(1)), Washington collection associated with Quercus garryana (Oregon White Oak), (Michael Beug, pers. comm.), late fall and winter (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown to olive-brown^ (Arora), brown (Thiers(1))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-15 x 4-6 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth^, (Arora), typically 11-14.4 x 4-6 um, occasional giant spores up to 17.6 x 8 um or 16 x 4 um, subelliptic to subfusoid or subcylindric, smooth, bright ochraceous in Melzer's reagent, ochraceous in KOH, moderately thick-walled; basidia 4-spored, 24-28 x 7-10 um, clavate, ochraceous in KOH; hymenial cystidia deeply embedded and often obscure, 28-42 x 7-11 um, clavate to fusoid to basidioid, colorless when young often becoming ochraceous when old; tube trama "obscurely divergent from central strand", colorless to yellow in KOH, "hyphal walls typically appearing incrusted or nodulose"; cap cuticle a loosely interwoven trichoderm, colorless to ochraceous in KOH; cap trama interwoven, colorless in KOH, some septa amyloid, hyphae 3-5 um wide; stem cuticle a closely packed turf of inflated to cylindric hyphal tips; clamp connections absent, (Thiers(1))
NAME ORIGIN  Rubroboletus eastwoodiae is named after the collector of the type, Miss Alice Eastwood. Incidentally the name Boletus satanas is after Satan, the ecclesiastical Latin name for whom is "Satanas". Some authors including Alexander Smith and the Millers call that species Boletus satanus but this usage is hard to defend. The ecclesiastical Latin for "Satan" is "Satanas" and Lenz presumably used this noun as the species name - there is no reason to correct it to "satanus".
SIMILAR  Rubroboletus pulcherrimus has a dark reddish brown cap, dark red (as opposed to paler and more vinaceous red) pores, and the stem is clavate or bulbous (as opposed to typically abruptly bulbous) with dark red reticulations, it is found in coniferous and mixed woods (not with oak), and microscopically the spores are larger, none of the septa of the tramal hyphae are amyloid, and the hyphae of the cap cuticle have noticeably roughened walls, (Thiers(1) comparing B. satanas to what was then generally known as B. eastwoodiae and which he and Halling later renamed B. pulcherrimus). Rubroboletus haematinus lacks the abrupt bulbous stem, has no gray color on cap or pink tones on stem, and grows with conifers. Microscopically, none of the septa of the cap trama are amyloid, and spores are larger. 
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus satanas not B. eastwoodiae), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus satanas), Arora(1)* (as Boletus satanas), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus satanas), Miller(14)* (as Boletus satanus), Thiers(9) (discussing B. pulcherrimus), Both(1), AroraPocket(1)* (as Boletus satanas), Desjardin(6)* (as Boletus eastwoodiae), Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*
58
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Rubroboletus haematinus  (Halling) D. Arora & J.L. Frank^ in Frank, Index Fungorum 248: 1. 2015;  Boletus haematinus  Halling  Mycologia 68: 980-983. 1976
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  {See also Red-pored Boletus Table.} Features include 1) a pale brown cap, 2) pale yellow flesh that stains blue when cut, 3) pores that are yellow when young, and soon become pale red to dark red when old, but nearly always remain yellow near the cap margin, and 4) pale yellow club-shaped stem that is finely reticulate.^ | The description is from Bessette except where indicated. RANGE ^Rubroboletus haematinus is found in ID and CA (Bessette), and WA (Castellano). It has been reported from MT (Larry Evans, pers. comm.). It has been sequenced from OR (D. Miller, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  7-20cm, cushion-shaped to convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old, margin "incurved at first, wavy, with a band of sterile tissue"; "yellow-brown to olive-brown or pale brown with reddish tints, especially on the margin", sometimes darker brown when old; dry, bald at first becoming appressed-fibrillose and rimose areolate [cracked to cracked like dried mud] when old^, (Bessette), (6)11-26(25)cm, light brown during all stages, occasionally bruising dark brown on disc when young, areoles becoming dark brown when old, frequently reddish tinges along margin and occasionally this color over most of surface, (Thiers)
FLESH  yellow, turning blue when cut^, (Bessette), 2-6cm thick, yellow, changing to blue on exposure except in stem base, eventually fading, (Thiers)
PORES  2-3 per mm, angular; "bright yellow when very young, soon becoming pale red, then dark red, and finally reddish brown in age, blueing when bruised"; tube layer 0.8-2cm thick, often depressed near stem when old^, (Bessette), pores "bright yellow when young, soon becoming pale red to dark red in age but nearly always remain yellow near the pileus margin, blueing where bruised", tubes 1-1.5cm long, yellow when young, becoming green-yellow to olive when old, turning blue on exposure, (Castellano)
STEM  5-12cm x 2.5-6cm, widening downward, sometimes somewhat bulbous (but not abruptly bulbous) at first, often nearly equal when mature, solid; yellow to pale yellow; dry, covered on upper two thirds or at least upper part with red reticulation [network]^, (Bessette), reticulations pale red, occasionally breaking up and appearing granulose; base staining brown when handled, (Thiers)
ODOR  not distinctive
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  unknown but possible dangerous (Bessette)
HABITAT  associated with fir species, especially A. lasiocarpa in Washington and A. magnifica in the Sierra Nevada mountains, apparently limited to subalpine forests^, (Castellano), on ground under mountain conifers, especially red fir, (Bessette) 
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-15 x 6-8 um, elliptic to fusiform-elliptic [spindle-shaped - elliptic], smooth, pale ochraceous^, (Bessette), basidia 4-spored; hymenial cystidia 40-45 x 7.5-9 um, obclavate to ventricose-rostrate, colorless; clamp connections absent, (Castellano), spores 12-15 x 6-7.5 um, elliptic to fusiform-elliptic in face view, subfusiform and inequilateral in side view, smooth, moderately thick-walled, pale ochraceous in KOH, ochraceous in Melzer's; basidia 4-spored, 25.5-39 x 10.5-13.5 um, clavate, colorless and sometimes guttulate in KOH, inamyloid; hymenial cystidia rare to infrequent and buried, 40-45 x 7.5-9 um, obclavate to ventricose-rostrate, colorless in KOH; cap cuticle a trichodermium of tangled repent hyphae, heavily incrusted in punctate or spiral fashion; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  means "blood-red"^ (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Rubroboletus pulcherrimus has a dark red pore surface that becomes orange-red, then brownish red when old, and a dull red to pale reddish brown reticulate stem, (Bessette). Rubroboletus eastwoodiae has a grayish cap with pink tones and a massive abruptly bulbous stem, (Bessette using the name Boletus satanas). Rubroboletus haematinus differs from R. pulcherrimus in the shape and color of the stem, the yellow color of the pores when young, the absence of reddish brown coloration in the cap, and the mycorrhizal associate, (Thiers). R. haematinus is distinguished from Rubroboletus eastwoodiae by the different mycorrhizal associate, the absence of an exaggerated bulbous stem, the absence of gray color on the cap or pink color tones on the stem, larger spores, and septa on hyphae of cap trama that are not amyloid, (Thiers).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus haematinus), Castellano(1)* (as Boletus haematinus), Thiers(9) (as Boletus haematinus), Both(1) (as Boletus haematinus), Desjardin(6)* (as Boletus haematinus), Marrone(1)*
59
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Rubroboletus pulcherrimus  (Thiers & Halling) D. Arora, N. Siegel & J.L. Frank^  in Frank, Index Fungorum 248: 1. 2015;  Boletus pulcherrimus  Thiers and Halling  Mycologia 68: 977-980. 1976
ENGLISH NAME(S)  red-pored bolete
NOTES  {See also Red-pored Boletus Table.} Features include dark reddish brown, tomentose to fibrillose cap, dark red pores, yellow flesh and tubes that turn blue, and club-shaped to somewhat bulbous stem colored pale reddish brown with dark red reticulations.^ | Thiers and Halling in 1976 examined the type of Boletus eastwoodiae (Murrill) Saccardo & Trotter and found it to be Boletus satanas (treated here as Rubroboletus eastwoodiae): what had passed in California under the name Boletus eastwoodiae was renamed Boletus pulcherrimus, (Thiers(9)). RANGE ^Rubroboletus pulcherrimus is found in WA, OR, and CA, (Thiers), and BC and NM, (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  8-20cm, convex, expanding, sometimes to flat or irregular in outline; reddish brown when young, usually with reddish tones particularly near margin, unchanging when old or darkening somewhat, moist to dry, bald to subtomentose to sometimes slightly velvety when young, unchanging or becoming obscurely appressed-fibrillose when old, often when very old somewhat areolate [cracked like dried mud] and obscurely fibrillose scaly, the scales often developing grayish tips^, (Thiers), "reddish brown at first, becoming olive-brown to grayish on the fibrils over a pinkish red to dull red ground color, distinctly pinkish red to dull red along the margin"; margin incurved at first, usually with a narrow band of sterile tissue, (Bessette)
FLESH  2-4cm thick, bright yellow, changing to blue when first exposed then often fading to pale bluish yellow^, (Thiers)
PORES  up to 1 mm, angular; dark red when young, changing to reddish brown when old, often yellow near margin, turning blue when bruised; tube layer 0.5-1.5cm thick, adnate to adnexed when young, usually depressed when old, yellow, turning blue immediately on exposure^, (Thiers), 2-3 per mm, angular to irregular, dark red at first, becoming orange-red, then brownish red, instantly turning blue when bruised, (Bessette)
STEM  7-16cm x 2-5cm, widening to 10cm thick at base, club-shaped to bulbous but not abruptly bulbous, sometimes equal especially when young, solid; pale reddish brown, base often staining brown, turning blue elsewhere when bruised; dry, dark red reticulation at least over upper 2/3^, (Thiers), partial veil and annulus absent (Bessette)
ODOR  mild^ (Thiers)
TASTE  mild^ (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  poisonous, causing severe gastrointestinal distress, at least one fatality, (Bessette)
HABITAT  single to gregarious in humus in mixed woods^, (Thiers), single or scattered on ground in conifer or mixed woods, August to January, (Bessette), summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Thiers), olive-brown (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-16 x 5.5-6.5 um, subelliptic to subfusoid, smooth, not dextrinoid, ochraceous in KOH, moderately thick-walled^; basidia 1-4-spored, 35-40 x 9-12 um; hymenial cystidia scattered, 33-60 x 8-12 um, fusoid-ventricose to subclavate to basidioid, colorless to ochraceous in KOH; cap cuticle a trichodermium of tangled hyphae with noticeably roughened walls; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "very beautiful"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Rubroboletus haematinus lacks red brown color in the cap, has a differently colored and shaped stem, has yellow pores when young, and is associated particularly with mountain conifers especially Red Fir, (Thiers). Rubroboletus eastwoodiae has 1) a pale gray to olive-buff cap (rather than brown), 2) paler and more vinaceous red pores, 3) typically abruptly bulbous stem (as opposed to clavate or bulbous), 4) association with oak, and 5) spores that are smaller, and 6) septa of some of the tramal hyphae that are amyloid, (Thiers comparing Boletus "satanas" - here treated as Rubroboletus eastwoodiae - to what was then generally known as B. eastwoodiae). See also SIMILAR section of Neoboletus 'luridiformis'.
SOURCES  Thiers(9) (as Boletus pulcherrimus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus pulcherrimus), Castellano(1)* (as Boletus pulcherrimus), Arora(1) (as Boletus pulcherrimus), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Boletus pulcherrimus), Ammirati(1)* (as Boletus pulcherrimus), AroraPocket(1)* (as Boletus pulcherrimus), Desjardin(6)* (as Boletus pulcherrimus), Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
60
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillellus amygdalinus (Thiers) Vizzini, Simonini & Gelardi^  in Vizzini, Index Fungorum 188: 1. 2014;  Boletus amygdalinus  (Thiers) Thiers  California Mushrooms  pp. 50-51. 1975;  Boletus puniceus  Thiers
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  {See also Red-pored Boletus Table.} Features include 1) a rose-red to ocher-red cap that bruises blue, 2) yellow flesh that turns blue when exposed, 3) red pore surface that bruises blue, and 4) yellow stem with reddish granules but no reticulation.^ RANGE ^Suillellus amygdalinus is found occasionally from coastal central CA into southern OR (Bessette). This species or one that matches its appearance occurs in Washington (M. Beug, pers. comm.)
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^application of KOH - flesh yellow to pale orange, cap cuticle red but quickly darkening; FeSO4 - flesh negative to pale gray, cap cuticle negative to pale gray, (Thiers)
CAP  6-10cm wide, convex becoming flat-convex to flat, often highly irregular or undulating, margin incurved becoming downcurved; typically dark rose to red when young, unchanging or changing to dark brownish red on the disc when older, sometimes changing to reddish brown towards margin; "dry, matted-tomentose to cottony fibrillose to appressed fibrillose, usually not appearing fibrillose scaly or rimose"^, (Thiers), 6-12cm wide, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old, margin incurved at first, even; dark rose-red to ocher-red when young, becoming dark brownish red to pale brown with reddish tints when old, bruising dark blue; dry, appressed fibrillose, sometimes finely rimose (cracked) when old, (Bessette)
FLESH  1-2cm thick, yellow, turning blue immediately with exposure, in stem yellow, turning blue immediately with exposure^, (Thiers), "yellow, instantly blueing when exposed", (Bessette), Laessoe(3) said that Suillellus is characterized "by fleshy fruitbodies with fine orange to red pores, strong and fast blue staining on all parts, and wine-red flesh in the stem base", so it would not be a surprise if there were wine-red in the stem flesh here, although they are talking about European species
PORES  0.5-1mm wide, angular; 'red ("ox-blood red" to "dragons-blood red" or "ferruginous" to "vinaceous-rufous")', turning blue immediately on bruising; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, shallowly to deeply depressed; dark yellow, turning blue on exposure^, (Thiers), pores 1-2 per mm, angular, pore surface "cinnabar-red to pale rusty red or dull red, instantly blueing when exposed"; tube layer 0.9-1.5cm thick, (Bessette)
STEM  5-9cm x 1-3cm at top, typically bent near base, equal to ventricose (wider in middle), solid; yellow, usually masked with red granules or tomentum, turning blue when bruised; dry to moist, bald at top, typically becoming tomentose to granulose toward base, not reticulate^, (Thiers), 4-10cm x 1.3-3cm, nearly equal or sometimes ventricose (wider in middle); "yellow and often obscured by brick-red to cinnabar-red granules", bruising blue; without reticulation; partial veil and ring absent, (Bessette)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Thiers, Bessette)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Thiers, Bessette)
EDIBILITY  avoid on the basis of the general rule about avoiding red-pored boletes
HABITAT  "solitary, scattered or in groups on ground, typically under oak and manzanita, but also reported under redwoods", October to January^, (Bessette), fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark olive-brown^ (Thiers), olive-brown (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11.2-16 x 5.2-8 um, elliptic to subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, thick-walled, often appearing 2-celled because of 2 distinct vacuoles^, ochraceous in KOH, dark ochraceous in Melzer's; basidia 4-spored, 30-35 x 9-11 um, clavate, guttulate; hymenial cystidia scattered, 45-54 x 10-12 um, fusoid to fusoid-ventricose with tapering apices, colorless, relatively obscure, sometimes appearing incrusted; cap cuticle "a trichodermium of interwoven hyphae with numerous free hyphal tips, frequently tapering toward the free end, not appearing cystidioid, pale ochraceous in KOH, hyphae +/- 8 um wide"; cap trama interwoven, homogeneous; stem cuticle "differentiated as a mass of caulocystidia or free hyphal tips, highly irregular in shape and size, ochraceous in KOH, sometimes appearing incrusted"; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores 11-16 x 5-8 um, elliptic to subfusoid, smooth, thick-walled, ochraceous, (Bessette)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to almond'
SIMILAR  Neoboletus 'luridiformis' has a darker cap and pore colors. The cap is dark brown and pores are dark red. It is also smaller, with different spores, smaller cystidia, laticifers in cap trama, and a different type of stem cuticle, (Thiers). N. 'luridiformis' has a dark brown to nearly blackish brown cap, yellow stem that is densely red-pruinose, narrower spores with thinner walls, and habitat under hardwoods or conifers, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus) (colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus), Desjardin(6)* (as Boletus), Siegel(2)*, Laessoe(3)
61
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus acidus  (Peck) Singer^  Farlowia 2(2): 271. 1945;  Suillus subolivaceus  A.H. Sm. and Thiers  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.68-70. 1964;  Suillus intermedius  (A.H. Sm. & Thiers) A.H. Sm. & Thiers
ENGLISH NAME(S)  slippery Jill, olive-capped Suillus
NOTES  Features include 1) an olive-brown to yellow-brown, glutinous cap that appears streaked-fibrillose below the gluten and typically has hanging veil remnants on the margin, 2) whitish to pale yellow flesh that is unchanging or stains dingy pinkish, 3) olive-grayish-buff to yellowish pores that are often beaded with droplets, 4) whitish to yellowish stem, 5) a large band-like annulus on stem, and 6) conspicuous glandular dots on stem that become blackish when old.^ | Regarding the synonymy of Suillus subolivaceus with Suillus acidus, Nguyen(3) wrote, "The /acidus clade contained sequences from the holotypes of S. lutescens A.H. Sm. & Thiers and S. subolivaceus A.H. Sm. & Thiers. We were unable to obtain a sequence for the type of S. acidus (Peck) Singer, but all specimens of what we identified as S. acidus based on morphology fit into this clade. (Smith and Thiers 1964a) thought that S. lutescens was closely related to S. acidus, and our sequence data support that relationship. To confirm the correct name for this clade, the holotype sequences for S. acidus will need to be obtained. Given the age of the holotype (before 1905), epitypification may be the best approach." When accessed on February 18, 2018, the online Species Fungorum gave the current name as Suillus acidus, and MycoBank gave Suillus subolivaceus as separate or a variety of Suillus acidus. Suillus acidus is rather common in WA and OR, (Smith(34) as S. subolivaceus). RANGE ^Suillus acidus has been found in WA and OR (Smith), the northern Rocky Mountains, south to OR and ID, (Bessette), and it has been recorded from BC (Schalkwijk-Barendsen). A collection from BC is at the University of British Columbia, and a collection from AK at the University of Washington (both as S. subolivaceus). The University of Washington has collections from WA and ID, and Oregon State University has collections from OR (all as S. subolivaceus). It is found in MT (L. Evans, pers. comm. as S. subolivaceus).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface stains dark brown to black with application of KOH, flesh stains lavender with application of KOH and grayish brown with FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  5-10cm, obtuse to convex at first, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat and often broadly umbonate when old, margin becoming flat to uplifted; olive-brown to brown, tan, or olive-tan; glutinous, appressed-fibrillose under gluten; margin typically with hanging veil remnants^, (Bessette), 5-10cm, broadly convex to nearly flat, "or obtuse and expanding to broadly umbonate"; dark dingy yellow-brown to olive-brown or dingy olive; glutinous and appearing streaked beneath by agglutinated fibrils, (Smith), 4-15cm, dull olive to olive-brown, grayish olive-brown, dingy yellow-brown, or dingy tan, (Arora)
FLESH  "whitish to pale yellow, unchanging or staining dingy pinkish when exposed"^, (Bessette), up to 1cm, spongy; pallid to yellowish or olivaceous gray, unchanging when bruised; in stem yellowish in upper part, pallid to brownish in lower part, (Smith)
PORES  1-2 per mm, angular; "yellowish to olive-buff and often beaded with droplets at first, becoming dingy olive, unchanging when bruised"; tube layer 1-2cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), 1.5-2 per mm when old, about 1 mm when young, colored as tubes more or less or slightly browner, unchanging when bruised; tube layer about 1cm thick when mature, adnate becoming somewhat decurrent, grayish buff to olive-buff when young and beaded with drops of a clear to cloudy exudate, dingy yellow when mature, (Smith), grayish olive to grayish buff or olive-buff when young and often beaded with clear droplets in wet weather, becoming dingy yellowish to brownish yellow when old (and droplets often drying blackish); tubes same color or yellower, (Arora)
STEM  6-10cm x 1-1.6cm, nearly equal or widening downward, solid; whitish at first, becoming dull yellowish; with pinkish brown glandular dots that darken to blackish when old or when handled, dry; partial veil whitish and floccose on inner layer, olive-brown and gelatinous on outer layer, forming "collapsed, median to superior, band-like, olive-brown, gelatinous sheathing annulus that is often thickened on the lower edge"^, (Bessette), 6-10cm x 0.8-1.4cm, equal, solid; yellowish in upper part and pallid in lower part; "conspicuously covered with glandular dots which are pinkish brown but soon blacken from handling and nearly always dry blackish"; annulus median to superior, membranous with an outer gelatinous layer colored like cap, often sheathing but not flaring at lower edge, inner layer white and floccose, annulus shrinking rapidly after breaking, (Smith), 6-12(17)cm x 0.8-2cm, white or yellowish above annulus, whitish to brownish below the annulus, glandular dots will stain fingers brown, (Arora), conspicuous band-like annulus "fastened to the stem at its middle, with its upper and lower edges free and covered on the outside with brown or olive slime", (Ammirati)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), slight (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), acid (Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups under mixed conifers^, (Bessette), gregarious under mixed conifers (Smith), scattered to gregarious under conifers, particularly Western White Pine, (Arora)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette), dingy cinnamon (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 3-4.5 um, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, pale ochraceous^, (Bessette), spores (8)9-11 x 3-4(4.5) um, typically subfusoid, smooth, pale ochraceous to greenish transparent in KOH, walls slightly thickened; basidia 4-spored, 18-23 x 5-6(7) um, clavate, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia 40-55 x 6-11 um, "subcylindric to narrowly clavate or subfusoid with obtuse apices", as revived in KOH either colorless or with yellowish brown content, the cystidia in fascicles with rusty brown incrusting pigment around the base as revived in KOH, cheilocystidia "scattered and in groups, like the pleurocystidia but often longer and frequently (as revived in KOH) with so much surrounding encrusting pigment that the cystidia themselves are obscured"; cap epicutis a thick layer of gelatinous hyphae 3-7 um wide "and with some bister incrusting pigment seen as revived in KOH, the hyphae as revived appearing to be appressed and rather crooked"; caulocystidia up to 70-x 12 um but mostly 40-60 x 6-10 um, "content of most of them dark yellow brown as revived in KOH", "in dense fascicles and with a copious amount of incrusting pigment"; clamp connections none, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "about the color of a fresh olive"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Suillus flavidus is smaller and has a paler cap, a slimmer stem, and less prominent glandular dots on the stem, (Bessette). S. flavidus has pale yellowish pores when young, has a gelatinous annulus, and grows with Lodgepole Pine, (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Suillus luteus and Suillus flavidus.
SOURCES  Smith(34) (as S. subolivaceus), Bessette(3)* (as S. subolivaceus), Arora(1)* (as S. subolivaceus), Ammirati(1)* (as S. subolivaceus), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as S. subolivaceus), Nguyen(3), Marrone(1)*
62
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus albivelatus  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and O.K. Mill.^  Lloydia 28: 121-123. 1965
ENGLISH NAME(S)  northern pine bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a viscid to glutinous cap that is orange-brown, becoming vinaceous brown or brownish red to yellow-brown when old, 2) a cap margin with scattered white scales or hanging veil remnants, 3) white flesh that may stain vinaceous, 4) round pores that are buff to yellow or orange buff, 5) dry stem that is yellowish to buff at the top and white in the lower part, the stem sometimes having a few glandular dots, and often having a fleeting ragged annular zone, and 6) growth under conifers especially pine.^ | The holotype of Suillus albivelatus is albivelatus is one substitution and 1 indel different in the ITS region than one of Smith's original 1964 collections of S. pseudobrevipes, so it may be that they are not separate species (D. Miller, pers. comm.). But the phylogenetic tree in Nguyen(3) shows a clear separation. RANGE ^Suillus albivelatus is found in the Pacific Northwest and the northern Rocky Mountains, south to ID and northwestern MT, (Bessette). There is a WA collection at the University of Washington. It has also been reported from BC (M. Beug, pers. comm.) and AB (Schalkwijk-Barendsen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^KOH on flesh gives pink then lilac-drab reaction, on cap cuticle no reaction, FeSO4 no reaction, (Smith)
CAP  4-12cm, convex becoming nearly flat when old; orange-brown on young specimens, becoming vinaceous brown or brownish red to yellow-brown when old; bald, viscid to glutinous; margin with scattered white squamules or appendiculate^, (Bessette(3)), 4-12cm, convex to broadly convex; pallid when covered by duff, when exposed soon pale vinaceous brown then slowly changing to dull cinnamon to dull yellow-brown, finally dingy ochraceous; buttons 0.2-1cm wide with a white-fibrillose veil over the glutinous to viscid surface, the veil breaking up into fine fibrillose scales then disappearing, in caps 2.5-8cm wide veil usually visible as white floccose scales over marginal area (or sometimes over all) and the margin toothed with remnants, finally all traces removed, especially in wet weather, when old often virgate (streaked) under the gluten; at times with part of the margin intergrown with stem, (Smith)
FLESH  white, becoming buff to lemon-yellow when old, especially near tubes, "unchanging or staining vinaceous when cut"^, (Bessette(3)), white but soon lemon-yellow, staining reddish around larval tunnels; in stem the base staining vinaceous brown from larval damage; "the interior surface and to some extent the exterior becomes vinaceous-lilac to vinaceous-pink" [unclear which part(s) of fruitbody this refers to], (Smith)
PORES  1-3 per mm, round; buff at first, becoming yellow to orange-buff when mature; tube layer 0.3-0.6cm thick, often depressed near stem when old^, (Bessette(3)), round, minute at first, finally up to 1mm when old, colored as tubes (pale ocher-yellow), not changing when bruised; tube layer 0.5-1cm thick, varying from depressed around the stem to decurrent, dull pale ocher-yellow, unchanging when cut, (Smith), pores somewhat boletinoid [radially arranged], (Bessette(1))
STEM  1-4cm x 1.5-3cm, nearly equal, solid; yellowish to buff at top, white in lower part; dry, smooth or with a few glandular dots usually near top; "sometimes with a ragged annular zone that soon disappears"^, (Bessette(3)), 1-4cm x 1.5-2.5cm, more or less equal, solid; white and becoming bright yellow, base more or less clay color from handling; lacking dots when young and when old lacking dots or with a few minute dots showing near top; veil at times (about 50%) leaving a poorly formed zone of fine scales midway on the stem, the fine scales whitish or discoloring to vinaceous fawn; reference is also made to the "annulus when present", (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette(3))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette(3))
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette(3))
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups on ground under conifers, especially ponderosa pine and other pines, June to August^, (Bessette(3)), late summer and early fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  cinnamon-brown to buff^ (Bessette(3)), near cinnamon-buff after moisture has escaped (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-8.5 x 2.5-3 um, elliptic, smooth, yellowish^, (Bessette(3)), 7-8.5 x 2.8-3 um, oblong, smooth, yellowish in KOH, only slightly more yellowish brown in Melzer's reagent; basidia 4-spored, many with red content; pleurocystidia in clusters, 38-50 x 8-12 um individually, subfusoid, clavate or cylindric, content and area surrounding cluster vinaceous-red in KOH; cap epicutis of hyphae 4-9 um wide, "appressed on cap surface (possibly a collapsed trichodermium), gelatinous as revived in KOH and with numerous minute granules in the gelatinous matrix, the granules +/- yellowish in KOH and in Melzer's sol."; caulocystidia in clusters or scattered and similar to pleurocystidia; clamp connections none, (Smith), clamp connections present on all tissues (Bessette(1))
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "with a white veil"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Suillus pseudobrevipes has a veil that sheaths the stem, the cut flesh does not show vinaceous lilac or vinaceous pink tone, and the pleurocystidia are rusty brown in KOH rather than vinaceous-red, (Smith). Suillus brevipes lacks a partial veil (Bessette(1)). Suillus glandulosipes does not have a complete outer veil at any stage, and does not have vinaceous colors in the stem except when old.
SOURCES  Smith(36), Bessette(3)*, Trudell(4)*, Bessette(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Nguyen(3)
63
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus americanus  (Peck) Snell ex Slipp & Snell^  Lloydia 7: 39. 1944;  Suillus sibiricus (Singer) Singer;  Suillus himalayensis  B. Verma & M.S. Reddy
ENGLISH NAME(S)  chicken-fat Suillus, American slippery-jack, American slippery-cap
NOTES  Features include 1) a viscid, yellow cap with reddish to brown spots, streaks, or plaques, 2) yellow or olive-yellow flesh that turns cinnamon brown to vinaceous when cut, 3) large angular pores that stain vinaceous brown to dull cinnamon when bruised, 4) a yellowish stem that is often crooked and becomes hollow, that has reddish brown to cinnamon or dark brown glandular dots and smears, and that stains vinaceous to brown when handled, and 5) a veil that leaves remnants hanging from the cap margin and occasionally forms a slight annulus.^ |The molecular study of Nguyen(3) provides support for the synonymy of Suillus sibiricus with Suillus americanus, although they did not have holotype sequences apart from Suillus himalayensis. They refer also to support for the concept from Klofac W. 2013. A world-wide key to the genus Suillus. Osterr Z Pilzkd 22:211278. Nguyen(3) mention that americanus and sibiricus could still represent different forms. [Klofac recognized Suillus americanus f. sibiricus and Suillus americanus f. helveticus in 2013]. Partly for that reason, North American descriptions of Suillus sibiricus are included for the present below and marked as such. |When talking of Suillus sibiricus, Bessette(3) said that Suillus americanus has a brighter yellow cap with reddish to cinnamon patches and a thinner stem that is typically less than 1cm, and does not have an annulus, Thiers(1) said S. americanus does not stain vinaceous in the stem base, and (Smith(34)) says that S. americanus has a thinner stem that is never hollowed out, and veil material seldom if ever occurs on the stem. |The online Species Fungorum, accessed December 4, 2017 gives the current name of Suillus sibiricus (Singer) Singer as Suillus americanus (Peck) Snell. MycoBank, accessed the same day, maintained them separately. RANGE ^There are collections identified as S. americanus at University of Washington for WA and at Oregon State University for OR, including one at the latter identified for the Oregon coast by A.H. Smith in or after 1946 (after the description of S. sibiricus). Distribution of Suillus americanus is eastern Canada south to NC, west to MN, and it is recorded from the southwestern United States, (Bessette who also recognized Suillus sibiricus, see below), MI (Smith(35)), and NS (Lincoff). Suillus sibiricus is found in WA, OR, and ID, (Smith(34)). Suillus sibiricus is also found in BC (collections at the University of British Columbia), CA (Arora; collection at Oregon State University), AK, MT, and WY (collections at the University of Washington), and MI (Smith(35)). Distribution is eastern Canada south to NY, west to the Pacific Northwest, and also (reported from) the Southwest, (Bessette for Suillus sibiricus). Sequences from collections identified as Suillus americanus and as Suillus sibiricus come from North America, Europe, and Asia (Nguyen(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap stains black with KOH, flesh stains olive with the application of FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  3-10cm, rounded becoming broadly convex when old, occasionally with an umbo; "bright yellow to ocher-yellow, with cinnamon to reddish patches or streaks"; viscid to glutinous when moist; "margin appendiculate with white to yellow or pale brown cottony veil tissue"^, (Bessette), 3-10cm, obtuse with incurved margin, expanding to broadly convex or with low obtuse umbo; bright yellow; "viscid, with scattered appressed patches of fibrils pale buff to dingy cinnamon", at times streaked with reddish fibrils in places; "margin with soft cottony veil material appendiculate or continuous all along it", the veil yellowish but when old the collapsed patches typically brownish, (Smith(34)), cap rarely with reddish spots (Smith(35)), 3-10cm, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old, sometimes slightly umbonate; ground color dull to bright yellow or ocher-yellow to olive-yellow, scattered appressed scales dull reddish to cinnamon-brown or dark brown; viscid to glutinous; margin with hanging tufts of whitish cottony veil that may disappear when old, (Bessette for Suillus sibiricus), 3-10cm, convex to obtuse, expanding to flat or slightly umbonate; ground color "chamois" (Ridgway color) to dingy olive-yellowish, "spotted overall but especially toward the margin with snuff-brown to cinnamon-brown appressed squamules"; viscid to glutinous; "margin at first a with soft cottony roll of pale dingy yellow veil remnants", or the roll often breaking up into teeth and finally disappearing, (Smith(34) for Suillus sibiricus), "with scattered reddish to cinnamon-brown or dark brown spots, scales, streaks, or patches of fibrils, especially toward the margin (but these sometimes washed off by rain)", "cap is usually bright yellow in dry weather and duller or dingier when moist", (Arora for Suillus sibiricus)
FLESH  "yellow, staining purplish brown when cut"^, (Bessette), mustard yellow, staining vinaceous brown when cut; in stem cortex yellow, lacking salmon hints, (Smith(34)), pale olive-yellow, slowly staining dull cinnamon when exposed, not turning blue, (Bessette for S. sibiricus), pale olive yellow, slowly becoming dull cinnamon when cut; in stem dingy olive-yellowish, (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus), thin, soft; yellow, not turning blue but often staining vinaceous or pinkish when bruised, (Arora for S. sibiricus)
PORES  1-2mm, "angular, occasionally radially elongated"; yellow when young, slightly browner when old, "slowly staining reddish brown when cut or bruised"; tube layer 0.7-1cm thick, often decurrent^, (Bessette), up to 1.5(2)mm, often angular, mustard yellow when young, duller ochraceous when old, drying dark yellow brown; tube layer 0.4-0.6cm thick, adnate to decurrent, dull yellow and staining vinaceous brown when injured, (Smith(34)), tube layer adnate to decurrent (Phillips), 1-2mm, angular and compound; yellow to dingy ocher-yellow, "staining dull cinnamon when bruised"; tube layer 0.8-1.5cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent, (Bessette for S. sibiricus), 1-2mm, "angular and often compound", dingy ocher-yellow, "staining dull cinnamon when bruised"; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, adnate becoming decurrent, dingy ochraceous to near "honey yellow" (Ridgway color), (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus), 1-2mm when mature, often somewhat radially arranged; mustard-yellow becoming duller or darker (ocher to yellow-brown) when old, not turning blue but may stain vinaceous or pinkish; tubes same color or dingier, (Arora for S. sibiricus)
STEM  3-9cm x 0.3-1cm, nearly equal, becoming hollow, often crooked; yellow; "speckled with reddish to dark brown glandular dots and smears", often developing wine-red or wine-brown stains when bruised or when old; veil covering most or all of the pore surface when young, but typically remaining attached to the cap edge and not leaving annulus on stem^, (Bessette), 3-9cm x 0.3-1cm, equal, often crooked, becoming hollow; lemon-yellow, generally vinaceous brown where handled; covered with glandular dots that darken to cinnamon-buff or browner when old or from handling, (Smith(34)), annulus lacking, the material from the false veil seldom if ever touching the stem, (Smith(35)), 4-10cm x 0.6-1.5cm, nearly equal or narrowing downward, solid; yellow to dingy ocher-yellow, often stained vinaceous near base; "with reddish to dark brown glandular dots and smears", dry; partial veil cottony, whitish, typically leaving remnants on cap margin, sometime forming slight annulus on stem, (Bessette for S. sibiricus), 5-10cm x 0.7-1.5cm at top, solid; dingy ocher yellow in upper part, "soon stained vinaceous at base"; "glandular dotted overall"; occasional specimens with annulus but partial veil typically hanging on cap edge, (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus), often curved, solid or sometimes hollow when old; yellow to ocher-yellow, often staining vinaceous or brown when handled and often vinaceous-stained at base; glandular dots and smears often inconspicuous when young but typically brown to cinnamon and quite conspicuous when old; veil cottony, whitish to pale yellow or when old sometimes brownish, usually remaining attached to cap margin but sometimes forming slight annulus, (Arora for S. sibiricus)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith(34)), not distinctive (Bessette for S. sibiricus), none or slight (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus), distinctive (Phillips for S. sibiricus)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith(34)), acidic (McKnight), acidic or not distinctive (Bessette for S. sibiricus), acidulous (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus), mildly bitter (Phillips for S. sibiricus)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette), yes (Bessette for S. sibiricus), yes, but A.H. Smith reports a case of acute allergic reaction by merely touching it, (Arora for S. sibiricus)
HABITAT  single or in groups or cespitose [in tufts] on ground under white pine^, (Bessette), gregarious under Pinus strobus (Eastern White Pine), (Smith(34) for northern and eastern US), single, gregarious or cespitose under white pine, (Smith(35) for Michigan), late summer and early fall (Miller), scattered or in groups under pine and larch, (Bessette for S. sibiricus), gregarious under Pinus monticola (Western White Pine), (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus), scattered to gregarious or clustered under conifers, associated with white (5-needle) pines, especially common in Pacific Northwest and northern California with Western White Pine, in Southwest with southwestern white pine and limber pine, (Arora for S. sibiricus), fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull cinnamon^ (Smith(34)), brown (Bessette), light brown to brownish orange (McKnight), dull cinnamon, (Bessette for S. sibiricus), "Sayal brown" (Ridgway color), (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus), brown to dull cinnamon-brown (Arora for S. sibiricus)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 3-4 um, nearly fusiform, smooth, pale brown^, (Bessette), spores 8-11(12) x 3-4 um, narrowly and obscurely fusoid; "smooth, weakly dextrinoid (pale tawny to pale cinnamon in Melzer's reagent)", "dingy yellow to brownish in KOH"; basidia 4-spored, 17-22 x 5-7 um, clavate, yellowish to colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia 38-60 x 7-11 um, subcylindric to clavate or obventricose, contents colorless or dark brown, in fascicles surrounded by amorphous bister-brown pigment as revived in KOH, cheilocystidia abundant, 40-65 x 7-12 um, cylindric, clavate or fusoid-ventricose, colorless to brown, "with a great deal of dark brown amorphous pigment at the level of the hymenium"; cap epicutis of appressed gelatinous yellowish hyphae 2.5-5 um wide; caulocystidia "like the pleurocystidia, in massive clusters and dark brown amorphous pigment often obscuring the entire caulohymenium"; clamp connections absent, (Smith(34)), spores 8-11 x 3.5-4.2 um, narrowly elliptic, smooth, pale ochraceous, (Bessette for S. sibiricus), spores 8-11 x 3.8-4.2 um, narrowly elliptic, smooth, pale tawny to yellowish in Melzer's reagent, pale dingy ochraceous in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 22-28 x 5-7 um, clavate, nearly colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia 40-70 x 6-9 um, "cylindric to narrowly clavate and often crooked, content of yellow to dark brown pigment", in bunches surrounded by brown amorphous pigment, cheilocystidia "similar to pleurocystidia, many somewhat ventricose", masses of amorphous pigment encrusted on wall end; cap epicutis "a pellicle of appressed-interwoven hyphae" 3-6 um wide; caulocystidia similar to cheilocystidia; clamp connections absent, (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus), spores 8-12 x 3.5-4.5 um, elliptic to spindle-shaped, smooth, (Arora for S. sibiricus)
NAME ORIGIN  means "American"
SIMILAR  Suillus sibiricus has a thicker stem and some fruitbodies in a group generally have an annulus, (Smith(35)). S. sibiricus has flesh in the stem base that stains vinaceous, (Thiers: by listing this as the most obvious and constant difference, he implies that this is not the case in S. americanus). Suillus flavidus generally has larger pores, has a somewhat smaller, more umbonate cap that is often pallid in color, and is associated with Lodgepole Pine rather than five-needle pine, (Thiers for S. sibiricus). S. flavidus is also described as bald (although Thiers describes reddish brown or concolorous plaques or spots as often on margin) and having a well-developed gelatinous annulus. Suillus americanus in eastern North America (reported from the Southwest with a few records from Pacific Northwest), has a brighter yellow cap with reddish to cinnamon patches and a thinner stem that is typically less than 1cm, and does not have an annulus, (Bessette for S. sibiricus). S. americanus does not stain vinaceous in the stem base, (Thiers). S. americanus has a thinner stem that is never hollowed out, and veil material seldom if ever occurs on the stem, (Smith(34) for S. sibiricus). See also SIMILAR section of Suillus acidus.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Smith(34) (for S. americanus and S. sibiricus), Smith(35) for (S. americanus and S. sibiricus), Phillips(1)*, Miller(14)*, McKnight(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Thiers(1), Bessette(3)* (for S. sibiricus), Arora(1)* (for S. sibiricus), Trudell(4)* (for S. sibiricus), Thiers(1) (for S. sibiricus), Phillips(1)* (for S. sibiricus), Nguyen(3), Marrone(1)*
64
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus ampliporus  (Peck) Kuntze^  Revis. gen. pl. (Leipzig) 3(2): 535. 1898;  Suillus cavipes  (Opat.) A.H. Sm. and Thiers  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.30-31. 1964 (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  hollow-stalked larch Suillus, hollow-stalked larch bolete, hollow stalk, hollow-foot, hollow-stalked tamarack jack, hollow-stemmed tamarack jack, hollow bolete, tamarack jack
NOTES  The distinctive features are 1) growth under larch and 2) the hollow lower stem (not found in other Suillus species). Other features are 3) a cap that is suede-like with dark brown and yellow-brown fibrils and scales, 4) yellow flesh that does not turn blue, 5) pores that are angular, somewhat radiating, yellow to olive yellow, and unchanging in color, 6) stem that is yellow and reticulate in the upper part without glandular dots, and cap-colored in lower part, 7) a veil that leaves whitish hanging remnants on the cap margin and often a slight annulus on the stem, and 8) microscopic characters that include clamp connections.^ | Nguyen(3) provide molecular and other evidence to show that the name Suillus ampliporus should be used for what has been called Suillus cavipes (Opat.) Sm. & Thiers in North America. RANGE ^Suillus ampliporus (as Suillus cavipes) is found in eastern Canada south to NY, west to the northern Rocky Mountains and AK, (Bessette). It is common throughout the northern hemisphere wherever larch occurs, including OR, ID, and MT, (Arora), ID, MA, MI, NY, and OR, (Smith(34)), WA (collections at the University of Washington), BC and NB (Redhead, collections at the University of Washington), and NS (Grund).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface black with application of KOH (Bessette)
CAP  3-10cm, rounded to convex, becoming nearly flat, occasionally with rounded umbo; covered with dark brown to yellow-brown fibrils and scales with an almost suede-like texture; dry; margin with hanging dry whitish veil remnants^, (Bessette), 3-10(12)cm, obtuse to convex expanding to nearly flat or at times with obtuse umbo; "cinnamon rufous" to "tawny" or "orange cinnamon" (Ridgway colors), rarely ocher yellow or paler, "moist to dry but not viscid, densely tomentose to fibrillose-squamulose", the tips of the fibrils often pallid; margin usually with adhering veil remnants, (Smith), "typically dark brown to reddish-brown to orange-brown or tawny (rarely paler), the margin and/or tips of the fibrils often paler", (Arora), dull yellow to reddish, reddish brown to dark reddish brown, rarely ocher-yellow, (Smith(35)), reddish brown usually, but at times can be pale yellowish brown, (Trudell)
FLESH  yellow, not turning blue when cut or bruised^, (Bessette), soft; white to yellowish when old, not turning blue when bruised, (Smith(34)), white to yellowish, in stem sometimes pinkish (Phillips)
PORES  0.5-1.5mm or more wide, angular, sometimes radiating; "pale yellow to olive-yellow, unchanging when cut or bruised"; tube layer 0.2-0.6cm thick^, (Bessette), "0.6-1.0mm wide and 1-1.5mm or more radially, angular, radiating, simple to compound; yellow when young"; tube layer 0.3-0.5cm thick, decurrent, pale yellow to greenish yellow, more olive-ochraceous when old, (Smith(34))
STEM  3-9cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal or widening slightly downward, typically hollow in the lower half at maturity; yellow on upper part, colored like cap on lower part; more or less reticulate at top, lacking glandular dots or smears; veil present, often leaving a slight annulus^, (Bessette), (3)4-9cm x (0.5)0.8-1.5(2)cm, usually narrowed in lower part and enlarged at top, nearly equal at times, solid in upper part, hollow in the base; usually colored as cap or a paler shade, top yellow at times; lower part "decorated with veil remnants at first but these soon vanishing, at times with a slight annulus", (Smith(34)), veil fibrillose-cottony, white, forming a thin, fragile, fibrillose annulus on stem and/or leaving remnants on cap margin, (Arora)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith(34))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith(34))
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under larch in forests and bogs^, (Bessette), gregarious to cespitose [in tufts] under larch, (Smith(34)), late summer and fall, (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^, (Bessette), dark olive-brown when moist, (Smith(34)), dark olive to brown (Arora), olivaceous (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 3.5-4 um, narrowly oval to ventricose, smooth, pale brown^, (Bessette), spores 7-10 x 3.5-4 um, narrowly oval to ventricose, smooth, nearly colorless in Melzer's reagent and greenish transparent in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 18-35 x 4-5 um, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia scattered to numerous, 42-56 x 6-10 um, subcylindric to fusoid-ventricose, colorless, thin-walled, cheilocystidia similar or obventricose; cap cuticle a deep loose trichodermium of hyphae 8-15 um wide, the cells more or less equal or narrowed at cross walls, colorless in KOH, yellow in Melzer's reagent; clamp connections present, (Smith(34)), spores 7-10 x 3.5-4 um, elliptic to spindle-shaped, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'large-pored'
SIMILAR  Suillus lakei lacks hollow stem, is associated with Douglas-fir, and lacks clamp connections. Other boletes under larch include Suillus clintonianus, S. ochraceoroseus, and S. elbensis: these also lack clamp connections.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Suillus cavipes), Smith(34) (as Suillus cavipes), Smith(35) (as Suillus cavipes), Arora(1)* (as Suillus cavipes), Trudell(4)* (as Suillus cavipes), Phillips(1)* (as Suillus cavipes), Miller(14)* (as Suillus cavipes), Lincoff(2)* (as Suillus cavipes), Lincoff(1)* (as Suillus cavipes), Ammirati(1)* (as Suillus cavipes), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Suillus cavipes), McKnight(1)* (as Suillus cavipes), Redhead(5) (as Boletinus), Grund(11) (as Suillus cavipes), AroraPocket(1)* (as Suillus cavipes), Nguyen(3), Marrone(1)*
65
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus brevipes  (Peck) Kuntze^  Rev. Gen. Pl. 3: 535. 1898
ENGLISH NAME(S)  short-stemmed slippery-jack, short-stalked slippery-jack, short-stalked Suillus, short-stemmed bolete, stubby-stalk, short-stemmed slippery jack
NOTES  Features include 1) smooth, slimy dark brown to vinaceous brown or reddish brown cap, 2) white to yellow flesh that does not turn blue, 3) whitish to yellowish pores and tubes that do not turn blue, 4) absent veil, 5) stem that lacks glandular dots and is usually short, and 6) growth under Lodgepole Pine.^ | This is "among our most common and widespread species" of Suillus in the Pacific Northwest (Trudell(4)). RANGE ^It is found in ID, OR, WA, and also CA, CO, FL, MI, TN, TX, WV, WY, (Smith), PQ, AL, (Lincoff), NS (Grund), BC (in Redhead), and MT (L. Evans, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle brownish black with application of KOH, flesh olive with application of FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  5-10cm, hemispheric to broadly convex, becoming nearly flat; variable in color, dark vinaceous brown when young, becoming paler to dull cinnamon, at times dingy yellow ocher when old; bald, glutinous; margin in buttons faintly white-tomentose but veil lacking and no roll of cottony tissue present^, (Smith), 5-10cm, obtuse becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old; "dark brown, vinaceous brown to cinnamon-brown, or grayish brown", fading to cinnamon or tan when old; bald, viscid; margin typically entire, incurved at first, (Bessette), 5-13cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat; dark vinaceous brown to dark brown, often fading when old to reddish brown, dull cinnamon, or even tan, sometimes appearing streaked; "smooth, viscid or very slimy when moist, often shiny when dry"; margin naked, (Arora), dark red-brown or gray-brown becoming more red or yellowish brown; margin sometimes slightly lobed (Phillips), dark vinaceous brown to cinnamon brown when fresh, becomes streaked and yellowish when old, (Trudell)
FLESH  soft; white when young, becoming yellow when old at least in top of stem, unchanging where bruised^, (Smith), white, often becoming yellow, at least in stem top when old, unchanging when cut, (Bessette), thick, soft; white or becoming yellow when old, not turning blue when bruised, (Arora)
PORES  1-2 per mm when mature, round, not elongating radially appreciably; pale dingy yellow when young, spotted from spores and cheilocystidia when old; tube layer 0.4-1cm thick, adnate to decurrent, dingy yellow, darker and more olivaceous when old^, (Smith), 1-2 per mm, round; whitish to pale yellow, becoming yellow to dingy yellow when old, unchanging; tube layer 0.3-1cm thick, honey-yellow to olivaceous yellow, (Bessette), pores and tubes pale when young, becoming darker or dingier yellow when old and finally olive-yellow, not turning blue, (Arora)
STEM  2-5cm x 1-2(3)cm, solid; white becoming pale yellow; unpolished to pruinose under hand lens, when young lacking glandular dots, when old glandular dots visible at times but never well-developed^, (Smith), 2-5cm x 1-2cm, nearly equal or narrowing in either direction, solid; white to pale yellow; dry, nearly bald, occasionally with inconspicuous glandular dots visible when old; partial veil and annulus absent, (Bessette), 2-7cm x 1-2(3)cm, equal or widening slightly downward, firm, solid; white becoming pale yellow when old; glandular dots absent or sometimes barely visible when old; veil absent, (Arora)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Smith, Bessette)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Smith, Bessette)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette), peel cap cuticle before cooking (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered to cespitose [in tufts] under 2-needle and 3-needle pines, in the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Coast under P. contorta, summer, fall, warm wet winter weather^, (Smith), scattered or in groups under pine, August to November, (Bessette), scattered to densely gregarious under conifers, particularly 2-needle and 3-needle pines, also spruce, (Arora), June to November (Phillips), summer, fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  near "cinnamon"^ (Smith), cinnamon-brown (Bessette), brown to dull cinnamon (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9(10) x 2.8-3.2 um, elliptic to oblong, smooth, inamyloid, pale yellowish^; basidia 4-spored, 18-24 x 5-6 um, clavate, colorless in KOH, yellowish in Melzer's reagent; pleurocystidia (in bunches with amorphous brown pigment surrounding base of cluster), 35-50 x 6-9 um, cylindric to clavate, colorless to brown, cheilocystidia similar or larger and more broadly clavate; clamp connections absent, (Smith), spores 7-10 x 2.5-3.5 um, narrowly elliptic, (Bessette), spores 7-10 x 3-4 um, elliptic to spindle-shaped, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "short-stalked"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Suillus granulatus has a stem distinctly more glandular dotted when young, and the cap is typically more mottled, (Smith). Suillus pseudobrevipes has a honey-yellow to yellow-brown cap with an appendiculate margin and annulus, (Bessette). S. neoalbidipes has a distinct band of cottony tissue on the margin of young caps, small clusters of caulocystidia, and rare to few clusters of pleurocystidia, whereas S. brevipes has bald cap margin, small clusters of caulocystidia, and numerous clusters of pleurocystidia, (Palm). Suillus borealis and Suillus neoalbidipes have a cottony roll on the margin of young caps and often have recognizable veil remnants, (McKnight). See also SIMILAR section of Suillus albivelatus, Suillus pallidiceps, and Suillus quiescens. 
SOURCES  Smith(34), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Ammirati(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Sept(1)*, Grund(11), Palm(1), Redhead(5), AroraPocket(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, MacKinnon(1)*
66
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus brunnescens  A.H. Sm. and Thiers^  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.91-92. 1964;  Suillus borealis  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and O.K. Mill.  Lloydia 28: 123-126. 1965
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a viscid to glutinous, appendiculate cap that is whitish to orange-cinnamon to reddish brown or dark brown and may turn more vinaceous or brownish when bruised, 2) white to yellowish flesh, 3) angular, yellow to pale ochraceous pores that darken (but do not change when bruised), 4) a white stem that becomes yellow at the top and stains darker when bruised or old, 5) glandular dots on the stem that may be rare or scattered, 6) a white to purplish brown or reddish brown membranous (not gelatinous) veil that stains vinaceous gray and that leaves remnants on the cap and sometimes an annular zone on stem, and 7) growth under conifers especially pines.^ | Nguyen(3) provide molecular and other evidence to show that Suillus borealis is a synonym of Suillus brunnescens. Because considerable extra information is contained in the S. borealis descriptions, those are included too. RANGE ^Suillus brunnescens is found at in least OR, ID, CO, and CA, (Bessette). The distribution is extended by including S. borealis. As Suillus borealis, S. brunnescens is found in the northern Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Northwest (Bessette), ID (Smith(36)), northern CA (rare - Thiers), WA (Buck McAdoo, Eugene Butler, pers. comm.), OR (Oregon State University Herbarium), and BC (Michael Beug, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains pink with application of KOH (Bessette), flesh stains vinaceous with application of KOH and grayish with FeSO4, (Bessette for S. borealis)
CAP  4.5-15cm, convex becoming nearly flat when old; "white at first, changing to yellow-brown or dark brown to lilac-brown as the gluten darkens, staining vinaceous, then brownish when bruised"; "glutinous to viscid, often streaked", bald; margin appendiculate [with hanging veil remnants] when young, becoming even when old^, (Bessette), 4-15cm, convex to nearly flat; at first white, the gluten soon changing to chocolate color but often showing a lilac brown tone while darkening; glutinous to viscid, often appearing streaked from the gluten, (Smith), 5-11.5cm, convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat, sometimes depressed when old; orange-cinnamon to reddish brown or dark brown, not changing when bruised; viscid to glutinous, often streaked, bald; margin appendiculate [with hanging veil remnants], (Bessette for S. borealis), 4-12(15)cm, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; whitish in buried buttons but color soon changing to light to dark dull vinaceous-brown or reddish chocolate color; bald, glutinous; margin "at first decorated with remnants of a false veil of dry cottony tissue except for the outer layer which is white when the cap is white but soon changes through vinaceous buff to army brown or more chocolate color and finally gelatinizes before the veil is obliterated entirely, typically forming a continuous band (not breaking into denticulate patches)", (Smith for S. borealis), brown, sometimes dark brown on the disc, fading to pale brown on the margin, (Thiers for S. borealis)
FLESH  white at first, becoming yellowish throughout or at least at the top of the stem and near the tubes, unchanging when exposed^, (Bessette), thick; white when young, becoming yellow in top of stem and along tubes or finally yellowish throughout, not staining when cut or bruised, (Smith), whitish at first, becoming yellow when mature, (Bessette), "white then becoming slowly bright yellow especially above the tubes"; in stem "white, then slowly yellow (especially in cortex)" and in the base where damaged by larvae "often orange-ochraceous to vinaceous-red", (Smith for S. borealis), 1-2cm thick, whitish when young, becoming yellow when old, changing to yellow when exposed in young fruitbodies, in stem white to yellow and unchanging when exposed, (Thiers for S. borealis)
PORES  2-3 per mm, angular to irregular; pale ochraceous at first, darkening when old, unchanging when bruised; tube layer 0.6-1.3cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), about 2 per mm, pale ochraceous and not staining when bruised; tube layer up to 1.5cm thick in large caps (mostly less than 1cm thick), adnate to decurrent, pale ochraceous, (Smith), 1-2 per mm, angular, "pale yellow at first, darkening to yellow and finally dull golden yellow" when mature, not staining when bruised; tube layer 0.6-1cm thick, depressed near stem when old, (Bessette for S. borealis), 1-2 per mm, round to angular; "pale dull yellow and not staining when bruised or only slightly brownish overnight, in age often grayish"; tube layer 0.4-0.7cm thick, "depressed around stem, bluntly adnate or somewhat decurrent (finally)", pale dingy ocher-yellow, (Smith for S. borealis)
STEM  3-7 x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal, solid; white when young, becoming yellow near top, "base staining vinaceous, then brownish when bruised"; dry, with glandular dots inconspicuous when young, becoming visible on the upper part when mature; "partial veil membranous, white, staining vinaceous gray, not leaving an annulus"^, (Bessette), 3-6(8)cm x 1-2.5(3)cm, solid; white and unpolished, becoming yellowish at top and small glandular dots then showing, base where handled staining vinaceous then brownish like the cap; veil "thin, membranous, white, staining vinaceous gray", breaking away from the stem and collapsing on cap margin, when old all traces having disappeared, (Smith), 2-4cm x 1.2-2cm, nearly equal, solid; whitish when young, becoming yellow near top, developing ochraceous tawny to reddish brown tinges, especially near base, when old or when bruised; dry, with glandular dots inconspicuous when young, becoming visible when mature; partial veil purple-brown to reddish brown, covering the pore surface when young, not forming an annulus, (Bessette for S. borealis), 1-5(10)cm x 1-3cm, equal, solid; white becoming yellowish, the base often dingy ochraceous from handling; pinkish brown glandular dots becoming visible by maturity, (Smith for S. borealis)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), slight (Smith for S. borealis)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild (Smith for S. borealis)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette), yes, when gluten has been removed, (Bessette for S. borealis)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under pines^ (Bessette), type under Sugar Pine (Smith), single, scattered or in groups on ground under conifers, especially Western White Pine, (Bessette for S. borealis), gregarious to subcespitose [somewhat tufted] in white pine area of Idaho, with larch and fir, mostly in rather dry areas, (Smith for S. borealis), fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette), brown (Bessette for S. borealis), pale "orange-cinnamon" when fresh, "cinnamon-buff" after moisture escapes (Ridgway colors), (Smith for S. borealis)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-9 x 2.5-3.5 um, oblong, smooth, colorless to pale honey yellow^, (Bessette), spores 6.6-8.8 x 2.8-3.2 um, oblong, smooth, pale yellow-brown in Melzer's reagent, colorless to dingy yellow brown in KOH, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 18-25 x 4.4-6.6 um, clavate, colorless to yellowish in KOH and often with amorphous granules, in Melzer's reagent pale yellowish to brownish; pleurocystidia 40-70 x 8-12 um, "in fascicles with the bundles surrounded by incrusting pigment more or less bister in KOH", subcylindric to fusoid-ventricose, content colorless to dingy yellow-brown, smooth or with some incrusting debris, thin-walled, cheilocystidia similar but more with brown content and adhering debris, so numerous at times as not to appear clustered; epicutis of cap a gelatinous trichodermium of hyphae 4-9 um wide and containing numerous dark brown granules in KOH, the walls soon almost completely gelatinized; caulocystidia similar to cheilocystidia; clamp connections none, (Smith), spores 6-9 x 3-5 um, subcylindric [nearly cylindric] to subelliptic [somewhat elliptic], smooth, colorless, (Bessette for S. borealis), spores 7-8 x 2.8-3 um, narrowly oblong, smooth, colorless to yellowish in KOH, only slightly more yellowish brown in Melzer's reagent; basidia 4-spored, many with amorphous red content in KOH; pleurocystidia scattered, 38-50 x 8-12 um, subfusoid, clavate or cylindric, content and area surrounding the cluster vinaceous-red in KOH and some clusters vinaceous-gray in a few specimens; cap epicutis of hyphae 4-9 um wide, "appressed on cap surface (probably a collapsed trichodermium), gelatinous and as revived in KOH with numerous minute granules in the gelatinous matrix and along the hyphae (some of these vinaceous in KOH but most are merely yellowish)", in Melzer's reagent the granules yellowish; caulocystidia "in clusters or scattered and similar to pleurocystidia"; clamp connections none, (Smith for S. borealis)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'becoming brown'
SIMILAR  Suillus pseudobrevipes has a honey-yellow to yellow cap and a white sheathing partial veil that leaves an annulus or annular zone, (Bessette), Suillus luteus is very similar but forms a conspicuous annulus, (Bessette for S. borealis). S. luteus has an annulus and lacks the vinaceous-red reaction in the stem where larval damage is extensive, and S. borealis has glandular dots that slowly become readily visible, (Smith for S. borealis). See also SIMILAR section of Suillus brevipes and Suillus pseudobrevipes.
SOURCES  Smith(34), Bessette(3)*, Nguyen(3), Smith(36) (as S. borealis), Thiers(1) (as S. borealis), Phillips(1)* (as S. borealis)
67
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus caerulescens  A.H. Sm. and Thiers^  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.36-38. 1964;  Suillus imitatus  A.H. Sm. & Thiers
ENGLISH NAME(S)  Douglas-fir Suillus, blue-staining Suillus, fat-jack, fat jack
NOTES  Features include 1) a dull cinnamon to orange-brown or yellowish cap that is viscid, appressed-fibrillose and somewhat streaked, sometimes with hanging veil remnants on margin, 2) cap flesh that is yellow staining pinkish, the stem flesh yellow staining blue-green in the base and vinaceous brown elsewhere, 3) large angular to irregular pores that are often radially arranged, the pores yellow to ocher bruising dingy vinaceous brown, 4) stem that is yellow above the whitish fibrillose band-like annulus and dull ocher-brown appressed-fibrillose below it (staining brown when bruised or sometimes blue near base), the stem lacking glandular dots but often weakly reticulate at top, and 5) growth under conifers, particularly Douglas-fir.^ RANGE ^Suillus caerulescens is found from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Northwest, (Bessette), only in Pacific Northwest and CA, (Arora), in WA, OR, and CA, (Smith(34)), in ID (Smith(36)), in BC (in Redhead), and in MT (L. Evans, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  6-14cm, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; "ochraceous tawny, reddish brown to pale yellow-brown or tan, typically yellowish toward the margin, sometimes with dark green stains"; "viscid to moist when fresh, appressed-fibrillose and somewhat streaked", becoming bald when old; margin often appendiculate [with hanging veil remnants]^, (Bessette), 6-14cm, broadly and shallowly convex becoming flat-convex to nearly flat or flat; color varying from uniformly dull "vinaceous" to "ochraceous tawny" on disc and yellow toward margin ("ochraceous buff"), or more dingy, squamules near margin sometimes colored near "cinnamon" (colors in quotation marks from Ridgway); "viscid but not truly glutinous and occasionally appearing only moist, usually with patches of agglutinated fibrillose tomentum which appears as scattered squamules or streaks", often appearing bald when old; margin at times appendiculate, (Smith(34)), "dull cinnamon to yellowish, but most often dull reddish-brown, orange-brown, or yellow-brown toward the center and yellowish to buff near the margin, with dingy greenish stains sometimes developing in cold weather", (Arora)
FLESH  "pale yellow, sometimes staining pinkish when cut", in stem yellow and staining bluish green in base when exposed^, (Bessette), 1-2cm thick, pale yellow, unchanging or assuming a dingy pinkish flush; in stem yellow, slowly staining blue in base when cut, elsewhere discoloring vinaceous brown, (Smith(34))
PORES  about 1mm, angular to irregular, often radially arranged; yellow to pale ocher at first, darkening when old, "slowly staining dingy vinaceous brown when bruised"; tube layer 0.6-1cm, adnate to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), 1.5-2mm broad radially, about 1mm wide, very irregularly angular and uneven from the irregular configuration of the walls, sometimes radially aligned but not always, occasionally appearing compound, pores yellow ("honey yellow"); tube layer 0.6-1cm thick, adnate to short decurrent, "primrose yellow" to "sulfur yellow" to "deep colonial buff" (colors from Ridgway), when old extensively discolored dingy vinaceous brown from bruising, (Smith(34))
STEM  2.5-8cm x 2-3cm, narrowing in either direction or nearly equal, solid; dull ocher-brown, staining brown when bruised, yellow above annulus; dry, appressed-fibrillose from base up to annulus, often weakly reticulate at top, lacking glandular dots; "partial veil dry, fibrillose, whitish, leaving an uneven superior annulus"^, (Bessette), 2.5-8cm x 2-3cm at top, narrowing toward the top or base or equal, solid; colored the same as the tubes above the annulus, duller and often dingy brown below annulus, stem staining brown where handled; reticulate at top from decurrent tubes, bald to furfuraceous-punctate above annulus, bald to appressed-fibrillose to dull and matted-fibrillose below annulus, no glandular dots; annulus band-like, fibrillose, pallid to white but soon discoloring as cap, not gelatinous, (Smith(34)), slight to distinct superior or median annulus that is fibrillose to band-like and whitish becoming colored like cap when old, stem yellow above the annulus, fibrillose and dingier below the annulus and often mottled with reddish or brown stains and usually staining brownish after handling, stem sometimes spotted but not glandular dotted, (Arora), stem base bruising blue when handled, (Phillips)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild or slightly acidulous (Smith(34)), none or slightly sour, (Phillips)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild or slightly acidulous (Smith(34)), none or slightly sour, (Phillips)
EDIBILITY  edible, with a lemony flavor, (Bessette)
HABITAT  "scattered or in groups on ground or among mosses under conifers"^, (Bessette), scattered to densely gregarious on ground under or near Douglas-fir, (Arora), mostly under mixtures of Douglas-fir, lowland fir, hemlock and redwood, with larch present at times, (Smith(34)), confined to Douglas-fir (Thiers), summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  cinnamon-brown^ (Bessette), dingy cinnamon (Smith(34))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 3-5 um, elliptic, smooth, colorless to ochraceous^, (Bessette), spores 8-11 x 3-5 um, elliptic, smooth, pale orange-buff to cinnamon-buff in Melzer's reagent, colorless to ochraceous in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 20-30 x 5-8 um, clavate, yellowish in KOH and Melzer's reagent; pleurocystidia of 2 types: 1) cylindric to clavate with brown pigment around base of cluster, 35-70 x 5-8 um, content brown to colorless in KOH, 2) fusoid-ventricose and isolated to scattered, 22-28 x 5-8 um, with refractive granules, cheilocystidia in clusters and 60-100 x 5-9 um, cylindric to clavate or narrowly fusoid-ventricose, colorless to yellow-brown; cap epicutis a collapsed trichodermium with elements 8-17 um wide, and a basal layer with elements mostly unbranched and 3-7 um wide and colorless to pale ochraceous in KOH, the layer gelatinous and up to 400 um thick; tube trama with numerous large contorted laticifers present, cap flesh with occasional laticifers; caulocystidia similar to cheilocystidia (in clusters and with pigment at base of cluster) occurring only at the annulus level; clamp connections absent, (Smith(34))
NAME ORIGIN  means "becoming sky-blue"^, (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Suillus ponderosus differs in having a viscid yellow to orange veil (before breaking) and a smoother, viscid to slimy cap, (Arora). S. ponderosus has a veil that is glutinous on the undersurface, (Smith(34)). Suillus lakei lacks the distinct blue change in the flesh of the stem base, and lacks the numerous laticiferous ducts in the tube trama, (Smith(34)). S. lakei has a fibrillose to floccose-scaly cap and the flesh of the stem base stains weakly blue-green or not at all, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Smith(34), Smith(36), Trudell(4)*, Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Ammirati(1)*, Redhead(5), Thiers(11), Both(1), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, MacKinnon(1)*
68
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus clintonianus  (Peck) Kuntze^  Revis. gen. pl. (Leipzig) 3(2): 535 (1898);  Suillus grevillei  (Klotzsch) Singer  Farlowia 2: 259. 1945  (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  tamarack jack, larch Suillus, larch bolete, elegant bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) viscid or glutinous cap most often rich reddish brown with pale yellow margin but sometimes all yellow, 2) pale orange-yellow flesh that bruises pinkish brown, 3) pores that are creamy when young, then yellow, and then dingier, usually turning brownish or rusty where bruised, 4) stem that is yellow above annulus and streaked reddish brown to brown below it, 5) veil that may have a gelatinous outer layer and typically forms a gelatinous annulus, and 6) growth under larch.^ | In western North America, the cap tends to be dark and cinnamon, but in Europe and eastern North America it is yellower, (Arora). |Nguyen(3) provide molecular and other evidence to show that the name Suillus clintonianus should be used for what has been called Suillus grevillei in North America. Suillus proximus A. H. Smith & Thiers is considered by Bessette(3) to be a synonym of Suillus grevillei and therefore presumably now of Suillus clintonianus. RANGE ^Suillus clintonianus is found in northeastern North America, west to the Pacific Northwest and AK, (Bessette). It is very common in ID and MT where larch grows, (Arora), and is found in BC (Bandoni), WA (several observers) and OR (R. Bishop, pers. comm.; voucher at Oregon State University), as well as NS and NC, (Lincoff(2)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface greenish black with KOH; flesh displays a pink flash with KOH that immediately becomes blue to bluish black, flesh stains olive-brown to olive-black with application of FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  3.5-14cm, convex, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old; "orange-yellow, dull red, red-brown, reddish brown, dark reddish brown or dark chestnut-brown"; bald, shiny, viscid to glutinous; margin with hanging veil remnants^, (Bessette), 3-15cm, convex to nearly flat; deep red to reddish brown with a yellowish margin, varying to golden yellow throughout or yellow with a cinnamon-tinged to rusty-tinged center; smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, often shiny when dry, margin sometimes with veil remnants, (Arora), 5-15cm, hemispheric becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; "chestnut" on disc, "empire yellow" on margin, at times bright yellow over all (Ridgway colors in quotation marks); bald, glutinous, "pellicle separable, margin sterile", (Smith), sometimes umbonate (Lincoff(1)), typically deep reddish brown "with a distinct yellow margin, although forms with all-yellow caps occur", (Trudell)
FLESH  pale orange-yellow, bruising pinkish brown; in stem "yellowish, occasionally staining bright green, especially near the base when cut"^, (Bessette), thick; yellow but often aging or staining pinkish to reddish, not turning blue, (Arora), 1-1.5cm thick, "straw yellow" to "amber yellow", soon rubescent (becoming "salmon buff" or "flesh color"), in stem flavous to "primuline yellow" at first, sometimes slightly sulphur to greenish in base when cut, (Ridgway colors in quotation marks), (Smith), bright yellow, changing to pink or flesh color when exposed (Thiers)
PORES  1-3 per mm, angular; yellow when young, darkening to olive-yellow or olive-brown when old, staining brownish where bruised; tube layer 0.4-1.2cm thick, adnate to depressed^, (Bessette), often somewhat radially arranged; creamy when young becoming yellow and finally dingy ocher or olive-yellow, not turning blue but usually turning brownish or rusty where bruised; tubes adnate to decurrent, same color, (Arora), 1-2 per mm, angular, rather thick-walled; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, adnate to depressed, becoming subdecurrent, "amber yellow" but finally "olive ochre", when bruised or cut becoming "testaceous" or "pecan brown", (Ridgway colors), (Smith)
STEM  4-14cm x 1-3cm, nearly equal or widening slightly downward, solid; yellow and smooth above annulus, streaked reddish brown to brown in lower part and often whitish near base; glutinous to viscid; lacking glandular dots; "partial veil yellowish with reddish brown streaks, cottony with a gelatinous covering, forming a gelatinous superior annulus"^, (Bessette), 4-10cm x 1-3cm, equal or widening slightly in lower part, solid, firm; "pale yellow when young but soon mottled reddish to deep brown or cinnamon below the veil and often staining brown when handled"; glandular dots absent; veil "yellowish before breaking, the underside often viscid in wet weather", usually forming median to superior, cottony, whitish annulus, (Arora), 4-10cm x 1-3cm, equal to slightly clavate [club-shaped], solid; flavous to "primuline yellow" at first, soon with chestnut variegations, dingy when old, or after handling often with a vinaceous brown cast; distinctly reticulate above annulus from extensions of decurrent tubes; typically floccose annulus that may have a gelatinous outer layer, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive or acid-metallic^ (Bessette), none to somewhat metallic (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild to slightly astringent to bitterish (Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette, Arora)
HABITAT  cespitose to gregarious, often in arcs and always associated with larch^, (Smith), early summer to late fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull cinnamon-brown^, (Bessette), olive-brown to dull cinnamon (Arora), olive brown when moist, dull cinnamon when dry, (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-10 x 2.5-4.5 um, elliptic, smooth, pale straw to nearly colorless^, (Bessette), spores 8-10 x 3-3.5 um, elliptic to spindle-shaped, (Arora), spores 8-10 x 2.8-3.5 um, more or less oblong, smooth, with a faint colorless outer sheath, pale olivaceous to ochraceous in Melzer's reagent and KOH; basidia not described; pleurocystidia numerous to scattered or rare, sometimes in fascicles [bundles], 40-60 x 6-8 um individually, subcylindric to clavate, but some obscurely fasciculate, smooth, brownish to yellowish in KOH and Melzer's reagent, thin-walled, bister incrusting material at base only, cheilocystidia similar to pleurocystidia, "in fascicles, incrusted with bister pigment at level of hymenium, the bundles scattered to numerous"; cap cuticle a trichodermium of long gelatinous hyphae 3-6 um wide, "the cells very long and narrow, end cells not differentiated"; caulocystidia single or in scattered small fascicles and with incrusting pigment as revived in KOH; clamp connections not seen, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  after Scottish mycologist R. K. Greville^, (Lincoff(1), Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Suillus luteus has a less brightly colored cap and a stem with glandular dots, and is not specific to larch, (Smith). Other boletes under larch include Suillus ampliporus, S. ochraceoroseus, and S. elbensis.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Suillus grevillei), Smith(34) (as Suillus grevillei), Trudell(4)* (as Suillus grevillei), Arora(1)* (as Suillus grevillei), Phillips(1)* (as Suillus grevillei), Lincoff(2)* (as Suillus grevillei), Lincoff(1)* (as Suillus grevillei), Miller(14)* (as Suillus grevillei), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Suillus grevillei), Bandoni(1) (as Suillus grevillei), Thiers(11) (as Suillus grevillei), AroraPocket(1)*, Nguyen(3), Marrone(1)*
69
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus discolor  (A.H. Sm., Thiers & O.K. Miller) N.H. Nguyen^  Mycologia 108(6): 1224;  Suillus tomentosus  var. discolor  A.H. Sm., Thiers & O.K. Miller  Lloydia 28: 134. 1965
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a glutinous to viscid cap that has a creamy buff ground color that becomes darker brown to olive-brown and finally cinnamon-brown, the surface densely appressed-grayish-fibrillose when young, 2) dingy ochraceous flesh that turns blue when exposed, 3) angular to irregular pores up to 0.1cm wide, colored dingy ochraceous, staining slightly green blue, then slowly brownish when bruised, 4) a dry stem with coarse orange-brown dots that become darker where handled, 5) absent partial veil, 6) growth under soft pines, 7) yellow-brown spore deposit, and 8) pinkish then sordid lilaceous reaction of flesh with KOH.^ | Bessette(3) say that handling the stem stains fingers dark brown. The description is derived from Bessette(3) except where noted. RANGE ^Suillus discolor was described from ID. Bessette(3) says "Idaho, distribution limits yet to be established". Nguyen(3) say it has been reported from WA, OR, ID, CA, CO, MT, and NM. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^"context slowly stains green with the application of FeSO4, and pinkish, then sordid lilaceous with KOH"
CAP  4-12cm across, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old, "margin incurved at first", wavy when old; "with a creamy buff ground color when young, becoming darker brown to olive-brown, and finally dull cinnamon-brown at maturity, dingy ochraceous toward the margin"; glutinous to viscid, "densely appressed-grayish-fibrillose" when young, becoming glabrous (bald); margin "even or nearly so"
FLESH  "dingy ochraceous, blueing when exposed"
PORES  up to 0.1cm wide, "angular to irregular"; "slightly depressed to decurrent"; "dingy ochraceous, staining slightly greenish blue, then slowly brownish when bruised"; tubes 0.5-1.0cm deep
STEM  3-8cm x 1-2cm, solid, nearly equal or narrowing downward; "with coarse orange-brown glandular dots that become dark brown to grayish brown where handled; dry; "partial veil and annulus absent; "basal mycelium ochraceous to salmon-buff"
ODOR  not distinctive
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single, scattered or in groups, on the ground under white pine, fall (September to October), (Bessette), associates with soft pines (subgenus Strobus), in particular P. monticola (Western White Pine) and P. albicaulis (Whitebark Pine) in western North America, (Nguyen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  yellow-brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-13 x 4-4.5 um, "oblong, smooth, pale rusty brown"^
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Suillus tomentosus has a more ochre-yellow cap "and a browner pore surface" (Bessette(3)). S. tomentosus associates with hard pines (subgenus Pinus), whereas S. discolor associates with soft pines (subgenus Strobus), in particular P. monticola and P. albicaulis in western North America.
SOURCES  Bessette(3), Nguyen(3)
70
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus elbensis  (Peck) Kuntze^  Revis. gen. pl. (Leipzig) 3(2): 535. 1898;  Suillus viscidus  (L.) Roussel  Fl. Calvados: 34. 1796 (misapplied name);  Fuscoboletinus viscidus  (L.) Grund and K.A. Harrison (misapplied name);  Suillus laricinus  (Berk.) Kuntze (misapplied name);  Fuscoboletinus laricinus  (Berk.) Bessette, Roody, & A.R. Bessette  North American Boletes p. 177. 2000 (misapplied name);  Boletus laricinus  Berk. (misapplied name);  Suillus aeruginascens  (Secr.) Snell (misapplied name);  Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens  (Secr.) Pomerl. and A.H. Sm. (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  grayish larch bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a slimy cap that is grayish to gray-brown to brown to yellowish, 2) whitish to grayish pores that become radially arranged and elongated, 3) pores and flesh that bruise weakly bluish green, 4) superior membranous annulus, or at least hanging veil remnants, and 5) growth under larch.^ | We are following the view of Nguyen(3) that the name Suillus elbensis should be used for North American species previously known under the name Suillus viscidus. "The /viscidus clade contains the currently accepted name Suillus viscidus (L.) Roussel, which has been applied broadly to three distinct clades of mushrooms occurring in North America, Europe, and Asia. The name S. viscidus, described as Boletus viscidus L. from Europe is best applied to the European clade, whereas the name Suillus elbensis (Peck) Kuntze best fits the North American taxon. [Latin names italicized]" Other names that were synonymized with Suillus viscidus in the online Species Fungorum, accessed February 18, 2018, include Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens and Fuscoboletinus laricinus. Suillus elbensis is often common in the Pacific Northwest (Arora as Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens). RANGE ^It occurs in ID (Smith(36)), WA (collections at the University of Washington), OR (collections at Oregon State University), and BC (collections at the University of British Columbia). It is reported from Montana (Larry Evans, pers. comm.). It is widely distributed across Canada and the northern United States, and reported as far south as MS with planted larch, (Bessette). Distribution includes MI (Smith).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^on cap surface no reaction with KOH, on flesh and stem surface brown with KOH, (Smith)
CAP  3-12cm, obtuse becoming broadly convex to nearly flat; "grayish to greenish gray or pale grayish brown to yellow brown or reddish brown"; bald, glutinous to viscid when fresh, gluten colorless, when dry sometimes areolate [cracked like dried mud]; margin with hanging veil remnants at first, then with a narrow sterile band^, (Bessette), 3-12cm, spherical then convex to almost flat, sometimes subumbonate; "smoky gray-brown to avellaneous, generally becoming paler to greenish gray, yellowish, or occasionally whitish in age, finally showing fuscous spots"; "slimy, innately fibrillose, fibrillose-squamulose, sometimes cracking when dry"; margin at first with hanging veil remnants, later with 1-2mm wide sterile band; pellicle separable, (Smith), "grayish white to gray, grayish brown, olive-gray, or dingy yellowish, sometimes with darker scales or developing grayish to dingy-olive spots", (Arora), gray to olive-brown or darker (Trudell)
FLESH  "white to pale yellow, staining bluish green when exposed (sometimes slowly and weakly)"^, (Bessette), firm then soft; white to yellowish white, turning bluish green when exposed; in stem white but at times becoming slightly yellowish, (Smith)
PORES  1-3mm wide when mature, round becoming angular to irregular and boletinoid [radially arranged and elongated] when old; "whitish to pale gray, staining bluish or greenish when bruised (sometimes slowly or weakly)"; tube layer 0.5-1cm thick^, (Bessette), round at first, becoming irregular and angular when old and often up to 3mm radially, in radiating lines with the pores compound (several smaller ones in a depression); "white, pale brownish or grayish to whitish at first", brownish gray to smoke-gray when mature, "staining bluish to olivaceous"; tube layer 0.6-0.9cm thick, adnate or subdecurrent, the same color, (Smith)
STEM  4-8cm x 0.9-1.6cm, about equal or widening downward, solid; "whitish to pale brown above the annulus, pale grayish to grayish brown or brown below the annulus"; fibrillose to scurfy, sometimes broadly reticulate near top; partial veil whitish to grayish, leaving a collapsed superior viscid membranous annulus^, (Bessette), 4-6cm x 0.8-1.2cm, equal or nearly equal and widening downward, sometimes narrowing in lower part, solid; pallid to greenish white above annulus, smoky gray, brownish gray or brownish below annulus; somewhat viscid in lower part, usually reticulate; partial veil submembranous, grayish to yellowish, rarely bright yellow, (Smith), pallid or tinged olive above annulus, gray to olive-grayish to brownish below the annulus; veil usually forming superior to median annulus, (Arora)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), fruity or mild (Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under larch^, (Bessette), late summer and fall, (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  vinaceous brown^ (Bessette), vinaceous brown when moist, nearer avellaneous when air dried, (Smith), reddish brown (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-12 x 3.5-5 um, elliptic to subfusiform [somewhat spindle-shaped], smooth, pale yellow brown^, (Bessette), spores 8.5-12 x 3.5-5 um, elliptic to subfusiform, smooth, slightly dextrinoid, nearly colorless to dingy yellowish brown in KOH, wall thickened slightly, without apical germ pore; basidia 4-spored, 20-30 x 6-8 um, "short-clavate to elongate-clavate", colorless to yellowish in KOH; pleurocystidia "mostly in clusters with yellow-brown incrustations concentrated around the base, with a hyaline to yellow-brown coagulated content", subcylindric to subcapitate, thin-walled for the most part, cheilocystidia similar or more broadly clavate; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to larch [Larix]'
SIMILAR  Other boletes under larch include Suillus ampliporus, Suillus clintonianus, and Suillus ochraceoroseus.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Fuscoboletinus laricinus), Smith(35) (as Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens), Smith(36) (as Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens), Arora(1) (as Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens), Trudell(4)* (as Suillus viscidus), Phillips(1)* (as Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens), Miller(14)* (as Suillus aeruginascens), Nguyen(3), Marrone(1)*
71
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus flavidus  (Fr.) J. Presl^  Wsobecny rostl. (Praha) 2: 1917 (1846);  Suillus umbonatus  E.A. Dick & Snell  Mycologia 52(3): 446 (1961) [1960];  Suillus helenae  Thiers and A.H. Sm.  Mycologia 65: 1375-1377. 1973
ENGLISH NAME(S)  umbonate slippery-jack, slim-jack, jellied bolete
NOTES  Suillus flavidus is recognized in North America by 1) a tan to yellowish to olive-brown, umbonate, viscid to glutinous cap, 2) pale yellow flesh that stains dingy cinnamon, 3) irregular pores that are often compound and often radially arranged, and are yellowish to olive yellow bruising dingy pinkish cinnamon, 4) a slim, whitish to pale yellow stem with glandular dots, 5) viscid annulus, and 6) growth under pines.^ |Authors have debated for many years whether Suillus umbonatus, described from Utah, is a synonym of Suillus flavidus of Europe. Moser(12) thought so and provided a detailed analysis. Here is the opinion of Nguyen(3) published in 2016, based on their molecular studies (with Latin names italicized), "The /flavidus clade contained specimens with names such as S. umbonatus E.A. Dick & Snell, S. megaporinus Snell & E.A. Dick, S. flavidus (Fr.) J. Presl, and S. helenae. Members of this clade exhibit the largest diameter of pores in the genus (up to 1cm). The name S. flavidus has been used for European specimens, whereas the name S. umbonatus is applied to the western North American specimens, and S. megaporinus is applied only to specimens collected in the Sierra Nevada of California. The holotype sequence of S. helenae (named for Helen Smith, Alexander Smiths wife) also fits within the group and was described from a single collection in Oregon. If holotypes of the aforementioned species fit in this clade, S. flavidus is the oldest name and should be used for this species." |They do include 6 collections identified as Suillus umbonatus in the /flavidus clade (3 from CO, CO, CA). |The online Index Species, and MycoBank, accessed February 18, 2018, both maintained them as separate entries, but this is just a reflection of the fact that the holotype of Suillus umbonatus has not been sequenced. |The balance of the evidence is that what we have been identifying in the Pacific Northwest as Suillus umbonatus should now be called Suillus flavidus (Pacific Northwest material does fit the description of Suillus umbonatus.) |On the subject of Suillus helenae, the molecular work of Nguyen(3) shows that the holotype of Suillus helenae from OR falls within the clade that included Suillus flavidus and Suillus umbonatus, which would indicate synonymy of Suillus helenae with Suillus flavidus under the latter name. Suillus helenae has been differentiated by lacking the partial veil and annulus of Suillus flavidus (Thiers(12) original description, Arora(1), Bessette(3)). Thiers(12) say (with Latin names italicized), "It has the stature and large pores characteristic of Suillus umbonatus Dick & Snell or S. flavidus (Fr.) Singer but both of these species have a veil and no such structure was present on any of the basidiocarps of this collection. The cuticular structure of S. helenae is also distinct in that there is no apparent gelatinization of the hyphae in KOH and, furthermore, these hyphae are relatively large and appear incrusted. The discovery of this species marks the first example apparently representing an evolutionary line branching from the S. umbonatus-S. flavidus complex." |Unfortunately for the view that Suillus helenae can be differentiated by lacking a veil, one of the fruitbodies in the black-and-white photo of the holotype with the original description (also seen on MyCoPortal) appears to have a distinct partial veil. RANGE ^S. flavidus has been found in WA, OR, ID, CA, and UT, (Smith), and was reported from BC (in Redhead). Suillus umbonatus also occurs in CA (Thiers(1), Arora(1)). Nguyen(3) include collections from CO and CA at least.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface stains reddish brown with KOH, (Bessette)
CAP  3-5(9)cm, obtuse when young, expanding to flat-umbonate or remaining convex-umbonate, in some the margin uplifted; typically "deep olive buff" (Ridgway color) or toward the margin somewhat paler, when young often evenly colored, but at maturity the margin often avellaneous to dingy cinnamon from dried gluten; viscid, typically uneven and often streaked from dried gluten^, (Smith), olive-buff to dingy tan or dull yellowish-brown, often more olive when old, especially toward margin, (Arora), tan to pale yellow, sometimes somewhat darker, often appearing conspicuously streaked when old, often with spots or flecks on the margin, plaques colored as cap or often reddish-brown, (Thiers), yellow to olive-brown and often streaked (Trudell)
FLESH  very soft; pale yellow, soon dingy cinnamon when cut, in top of stem pale yellow^, (Smith)
PORES  1-1.5mm, compound to irregular, obscurely radiate to typically boletoid [arranged radially]; "pale yellow to greenish yellow", "staining sordid pinkish cinnamon when bruised"; tube layer 0.4-0.6cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent^, (Smith), tubes colored as pores (Arora)
STEM  (2.5)3-5(9)cm x 0.4-0.8(1.2)cm, equal, solid; pale yellow above annulus, paler to pallid or whitish below annulus but base sometimes discoloring; glandular dotted with pallid to yellowish dots both above and below annulus; gelatinous median to superior annulus that becomes dingy cinnamon where handled; "gelatinous veil soon dingy pinkish cinnamon"^, (Smith), "pale yellow or tan above annulus, same color or paler below, with pallid to yellow-brown, often obscure glandular dots", often brownish-stained where handled; veil viscid-gelatinous, pale brownish, forming median to superior gelatinous annulus, (Arora)
ODOR  none^ (Smith)
TASTE  slightly sour^ (Smith)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious to subcespitose [somewhat tufted] under Pinus contorta^ (Smith), scattered to gregarious or in small clumps under conifers, "particularly lodgepole and beach pines (Pinus contorta)", (Arora)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull cinnamon^ (Smith), olive-brown to dull cinnamon-brown, (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9(10) x 4-4.5 um, narrowly elliptic to nearly oblong, smooth, yellowish in KOH, darker yellowish to pale tawny in Melzer's reagent^; basidia 4-spored, 20-26 x 5-7 um, clavate, colorless or nearly so; pleurocystidia 28-46 x 5-8 um, cylindric, clavate, or narrowed at apex, content colorless to yellowish brown, with some amorphous debris adhering to outer surface, scattered or present in bundles with brown amorphous pigment around base of bundle, cheilocystidia similar; cap epicutis a thin layer of gelatinous to subgelatinous hyphae 3-6 um wide and yellowish in KOH, the ends often ascending to form an obscure turf; caulocystidia "in bundles surrounded by brown pigment and similar to cheilocystidia, and unincrusted septate (near base) crooked filaments 30-50 x 4-6 um also present in a dense to lax turf"; clamp connections absent, (Smith), spores 7-11 x 3.5-4.5 um, elliptic to spindle-shaped, smooth, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'umbonate'
SIMILAR  Suillus helenae is similar but lacks a veil (Arora). Suillus sibiricus "can be distinguished by the absence of an annulus, the much brighter and more intensely yellow pileus, and the vinaceous discoloration of the context of the base of the stipe", (Thiers). Suillus acidus is larger with a thicker stem, a darker cap, and more prominent glandular dots on the stem, (Bessette as Suillus subolivaceus comparing to Suillus flavidus). 
SOURCES  Smith(34) (as Suillus umbonatus), Arora(1)* (as Suillus umbonatus), Thiers(1) (as Suillus umbonatus), Phillips(1)* (as Suillus umbonatus), Miller(14)*, Redhead(5) (as Suillus umbonatus), Trudell(4)* (as Suillus umbonatus), AroraPocket(1)* (as Suillus umbonatus), Bessette(3)*, Desjardin(6)* (as Suillus umbonatus), Nguyen(3), Thiers(11) (as Suillus umbonatus and Suillus helenae), Thiers(12) (as Suillus helenae), Siegel(2)* (as Suillus umbonatus), Moser(12)
72
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus flavogranulatus  A.H. Sm., Thiers, and O.K. Mill.^  Lloydia 28: 127-128. 1965
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a bald, glutinous to viscid cap that is yellow to ochraceous and has a margin with narrow band of sterile tissue at first, 2) flesh that is white except for yellow in the top of the stem and sometimes brown in stem base, 3) large yellow unchanging pores, 4) a whitish to yellow stem that develops pinkish brown dots but does not have a veil or an annulus, and 5) growth under pines.^ | Nguyen(3) provide molecular evidence that the type of S. flavogranulatus is Suillus lakei, which is surprising because the descriptions are so different. D. Miller, pers. comm. May 14, 2022, has added, "However, the description of Suillus flavogranulatus is very much like pale yellow to pale ochraceous Suillus subalpinus. The latter, with a variable cap color, was recently discovered to be present in the Pacific Northwest. If a non-lakei neotype is designated for the species as described, and S. subalpinus and S. flavogranulatus are the same, S. flavogranulatus is the older name." RANGE ^Suillus flavogranulatus is found in BC, ID, and WA, (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains pinkish then dull lilac with application of KOH and olive with FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  6-9cm, convex becoming nearly flat; pale yellow at first, becoming pale ochraceous when mature; bald, glutinous to viscid; "margin with a narrow band of sterile tissue when young", even or nearly so when mature^, (Bessette), 6-9cm, convex expanding to flat or nearly so; pallid under the slime (which becomes smoky-colored), then pale yellow to pale ochraceous; bald and with a naked margin when young, covered with slime, (Smith)
FLESH  white, but yellow in top of stem, not staining in cap when exposed but sometimes brown in stem base when old^, (Bessette), thick; white except yellow in stem [or perhaps only top of stem, unclear from description], unchanging when cut except in base slowly changing to pinkish brown, (Smith)
PORES  1-2.5mm, somewhat elongated and irregular; yellow to dingy yellow, not turning blue when bruised; tubes 0.6-1cm thick, depressed near stem when old^, (Bessette), 1-2(2.5)mm, more or less isodiametric (scarcely any boletinoid configuration), yellow and becoming glandular dotted; but layer up to 1cm thick, depressed around stem, pale dingy yellow and unchanging, (Smith)
STEM  3-5cm x 1.2-2cm, nearly equal, solid; whitish at first becoming yellow; dry, developing numerous pinkish brown glandular dots on upper two-thirds; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 3-5cm x 1.2-1.8cm, equal or nearly so, solid; white, slowly becoming yellow, base brown only when old; with numerous pinkish brown glandular dots over upper 2/3, (Smith)
ODOR  somewhat unpleasant^ (Bessette, Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild (Smith)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under pines^, (Bessette)
SPORE DEPOSIT  pale rusty cinnamon^, (Bessette), "pale rusty cinnamon after escape of moisture", (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.5-9 x 3-3.5 um, oblong, smooth, pale yellow^, (Bessette), spores 7.5-9 x 3-3.2 um, oblong, smooth, somewhat dextrinoid, yellowish to nearly colorless in KOH; basidia "4-spored in some areas, many with vinaceous to vinaceous-brown content (as revived in KOH)"; pleurocystidia clustered, 40-56 x 7-10 um individually, "clavate to subfusoid or subcylindric, content lilaceous when first revived in KOH, but soon dull vinaceous-red to vinaceous-brown, pigment diffused throughout the cell and in amorphous masses around the bundle"; cap cuticle an outer gelatinous trichodermium of hyphae 3-8(10) um wide "with much granular material around and along the granular sheath"; caulocystidia in clusters and similar to pleurocystidia in size, shape and color in KOH; clamp connections none, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means "yellow-granulated"^ (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Suillus granulatus is very similar but its cap develops reddish cinnamon tones when mature and its pores are much smaller, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Smith(36), Bessette(3)*, Both(1), Nguyen(3)
73
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus fuscotomentosus  Thiers & A.H. Sm.^  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.65-66. 1964;  Suillus acerbus  A.H. Sm. & Thiers
ENGLISH NAME(S)  poor man's slippery-jack
NOTES  Features include 1) a cap with olive-brown to dark brown fibrils or fibrillose scales, 2) whitish to yellowish flesh that does not turn blue, 3) yellowish pores that do not change color, 4) whitish to yellowish stem with conspicuous dots that are colored like the stem then brown, and 5) growth under pine.^ RANGE ^Suillus fuscotomentosus is found in OR and CA (Bessette). Oregon State University has one collection from OR labeled as this species, and the University of British Columbia has one collection from BC labeled as this species.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle black with application of KOH, negative with FeSO4; flesh gives a pink flash then grayish pink with application of KOH, greenish gray with FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  4-15cm, convex to flat; "at first covered with olive-brown to dark brown or fuscous [deep grayish brown] fibrils or small fibrillose scales", the scales often sparser when old revealing the paler (dull ocher to buff) ground color, sometimes more cinnamon overall when mature or appearing streaked; dry, or viscid when old or in wet weather; margin bald^, (Arora), 3.5-15cm, subconic to convex to obtusely convex, becoming broadly convex to flat-convex, occasionally very irregular with wavy margin; when young colored olive brown near to fuscous on the disc, unchanging or fading slightly toward the margin, when old slowly fading to dark vinaceous brown, eventually becoming near cinnamon, fibrils more or less the same color as the surface or darker than the surface; moist to obscurely viscid when old, conspicuously fibrillose to fibrillose-scaly to almost squamulose when young, fibrils often becoming agglutinated at tips, sometimes becoming less dense when old and appearing appressed, sometimes appearing bald when very old; margin without veil remnants (no evidence of partial veil at any stage), (Smith), "when young densely covered with olive-brown to dark brown or vinaceous brown fibrils, mature specimens with a thinner and more widely separated layer of brown fibrils on a buff to yellow or pale ochre ground color", (Bessette)
FLESH  thick; "yellow to pale orange or orange-buff", not turning blue when bruised^, (Arora), 1-2cm thick at disc, whitish, changing to yellowish when older, unchanging when exposed; in stem colored as stem surface and unchanging when exposed, (Smith), pale yellow to yellow (Bessette)
PORES  "typically orange-buff when young and sometimes beaded with droplets, becoming yellowish-buff to dark dingy yellow or olive-yellow" when old, not turning blue when bruised; tubes the same color^, (Arora), up to 1mm, often less and rarely more, angular; pale yellow when young, finally becoming olive yellow, unchanging when bruised, tube layer up to 1.5cm thick, adnate to shallowly and narrowly depressed around stem, unchanging or becoming subdecurrent to broadly shallowly depressed when old, colored as pores and unchanging when bruised or exposed, (Smith), 1-2 per mm, angular; "pale yellow at first, becoming yellow to olive-yellow or dull golden yellow" when mature, not staining when bruised; tube layer 0.8-1.5cm thick, (Bessette)
STEM  4-12cm x 1-3cm, equal or somewhat wider in lower part, solid, firm; "pallid to yellow or brownish-buff or often pinkish-orange to pale orange, especially toward base", glandular dots and smears present, usually conspicuous at least when old, often elongated, colored as stem or darker (brown to cinnamon); veil absent^, (Arora), 4-10cm x 1-3cm at top, equal to typically obscurely clavate to clavate, solid; ' when young colored near "Naples yellow" to "mustard yellow", with age sometimes becoming near "amber yellow" to "strontian yellow" at the apex, typically becoming "pale olive buff" to "warm buff", occasionally becoming "pale pinkish vinaceous", particularly at the base' (Ridgway colors), unchanging on bruising; moist but not viscid, strongly punctate, glands relatively large and often becoming elongated when old, colored more or less as the surface but darkening when handled; no annulus; mycelium at base white to "avellaneous" (Ridgway color), (Smith), solid; yellow to pale yellow; dry, with dense conspicuous brown to vinaceous brown glandular dots; partial veil and annulus absent, (Bessette)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive to weakly acid and unpleasant^, (Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes, but slimy and insipid, (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered to densely gregarious on ground under pines^, (Arora), single, scattered, or in groups on ground under pine, (Bessette), type single to gregarious in sandy soil in mixed woods, (Smith)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown to dull cinnamon-brown^ (Arora), olive-brown (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-12 x 3-4 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth^, (Arora), spores 9-12 x 3-4 um, fusoid to subelliptic to subcylindric, smooth, pale ochraceous in Melzer's reagent, pale yellow in KOH, thin-walled; basidia apparently 2-spored to 4-spored, 21-24 x 6-8 um, clavate, colorless; cystidia in clusters or fascicles, rare to absent on sides of tubes, but abundant on pores, 30-45 x 8-10 um, cylindric to subclavate to obtusely fusoid to highly irregular in shape, typically staining dark brown to black in KOH, appearing incrusted near the pores, often only basal part of cluster staining when on sides of tubes; cap cuticle "a highly uneven turf of more or less erect, septate hyphal tips, not at all or only slightly gelatinous in KOH, hyphae typically appearing incrusted, and staining pale brown", cells +/- 7 um wide; surface of stem "not gelatinous in KOH, with numerous large clusters of caulocystidia" 60-90 x 6-10 um individually, which stain dark vinaceous to black in KOH, cylindric to highly irregular in shape; clamp connections not seen, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means "dark brown tomentose"^, (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Suillus tomentosus has flesh that changes to blue, the color of the cap is lighter, and the spores are smaller, (Smith). The pore surface of S. tomentosus is also darker when young, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Smith(34), Arora(1)*, Bessette(3)*, Both(1), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
74
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus glandulosipes  A.H. Sm. and Thiers^  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.86-88. 1964;  Suillus neoalbidipes  M.E. Palm & E.L. Stewart  Mycologia 76: 433-438. 1984
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Distinctive features are 1) the conspicuous cottony tissue on the cap margin when young and 2) the numerous glandular dots and smears that are inconspicuous becoming conspicuous, pale becoming dark brown to black. Other features include 3) a viscid to glutinous, bald cap that is yellowish to pale pinkish tan or reddish cinnamon to cinnamon, 4) white to pale flesh that does not turn blue, but may turn brownish in the stem base when injured, 5) angular buff to yellowish pores that that sometimes become olive-brown (but do not change color when bruised) and when young often have reddish brown moisture droplets, 6) white to pale yellow stem that stains brown when handled and does not have an annulus, and 7) growth under pine.^ | Nguyen(3) provide molecular and other evidence to show that Suillus neoalbidipes should be considered a synonym of Suillus glandulosipes. Because considerable extra information is contained in the S. neoalbidipes descriptions, those are included too. Suillus neoalbidipes was previously referred to as Suillus albidipes, but the type for that species was found to be Suillus granulatus. RANGE ^Suillus glandulosipes is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest and northern CA, and has been reported from MI, (Bessette). There is a collection from OR at Oregon State University. Suillus neoalbidipes is considered a synonym here based on Nguyen(3). S. neoalbidipes is found in northeastern North America, west to WI and the Pacific Coast, (Bessette), OR (collections at Oregon State University), WA and WY (collections at the University of Washington), MN (Palm), and NS (Grund). It has been reported from BC (in Redhead as Suillus albidipes), and there is a collection at Pacific Forestry Centre in Victoria from BC as Suillus granulatus that is found in the Nguyen(3) phylogenetic tree with Suillus glandulosipes.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh stains lilac-gray with application of KOH and olive-green with FeSO4, (Bessette), cap cuticle stains grayish olive with application of KOH, and greenish gray with FeSO4; flesh stains pink then lilac-gray with application of KOH, olive-blue to bluish gray with FeSO4, (Bessette for Suillus neoalbidipes)
CAP  6-12cm, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat, sometimes shallowly depressed when old; yellowish to pale pinkish tan or reddish cinnamon to cinnamon; viscid to glutinous, bald, sometimes virgate [streaked] under gluten; margin "strongly incurved to inrolled with a conspicuous white cottony roll when young, often uneven, becoming wavy and appendiculate"^, (Bessette), 6-12cm, convex becoming broadly convex to flat-convex to flat or shallowly depressed when old, often highly uneven to wavy or irregular toward margin when old; when young yellow to pale tan or reddish cinnamon, unchanging when old or becoming near "ochraceous tawny" to "Mikado brown" to "verona brown" to "warm sepia" to "cinnamon rufous" (Ridgway colors); viscid, when young bald or with irregularly distributed fibrils near margin and more rarely on disc, typically becoming bald when old, with gluten drying in streaks, rarely appearing somewhat fibrillose and pitted or wrinkled when old; margin "strongly incurved to inrolled, with a conspicuous white cottony roll when young, disappearing with age", (Smith), 4-10cm, becoming hemispheric then broadly convex; when young dark orange yellow to deep yellowish brown over cream to tan ground color, sometimes with slightly pinkish tones, when older various shades of dark brown to light brown to orange-yellow over pale brown color, no color change when injured; viscid to glutinous, bald, sometimes radially fibrillose when old; margin "inrolled when young, with a band of yellowish white to light grayish yellowish brown sterile cottony tissue", tissue often remaining in patches on margin as cap expands, but often collapsing when old, (Palm for S. neoalbidipes), white, pale pinkish cinnamon, dull orange-yellow or yellowish tan when young, becoming darker cinnamon to pale brown or yellowish brown with moderate orange-yellow tones, (Bessette for S. neoalbidipes), dark orange yellow to deep yellowish brown, (Both as S. albidipes), dingy yellowish pink when young to pinkish yellow or light grayish yellow when old, (McKnight for S. albidipes)
FLESH  "white to pale yellow, not staining blue when cut or bruised"^, (Bessette), 1-2cm thick on disc, firm; white when very young, becoming pale yellow, unchanging when bruised or rarely becoming pale "avellaneous" (Ridgway color) when old; in stem white when young becoming colored near "warm buff" to "ivory yellow" when old, usually unchanging when exposed, but sometimes darkening slightly at base, or becoming vinaceous when old, (Smith), 1.2-2(2.5)cm thick above stem, tapering to margin; yellowish white becoming light greenish yellow, no color change when injured; watery green line often present above tubes when mature; in stem yellowish white, becoming light greenish yellow at top, paler in remainder, base often brown from insect infestation, (Palm for S. neoalbidipes), white becoming pale yellow at maturity, (Bessette for S. neoalbidipes)
PORES  1-2 per mm, angular; buff to pale tan when young, becoming pale yellow to dingy yellow when old, "unchanging when bruised, often beaded with reddish brown moisture drops when fresh"^, (Bessette), 1-2 per mm, angular; colored as tubes, unchanging when bruised, "often with reddish brown glandulae on the mouths"; tube layer 0.4-1cm thick, "decurrent to subdecurrent to occasionally shallowly depressed", when young colored "warm buff" to "light ochraceous buff" to "pale ochraceous buff" to "cream buff" changing to "antimony yellow" to "chamois" when old (Ridgway colors), unchanging when bruised, (Smith), 2-3 per mm, round or becoming slightly radially elongate; yellow, sometimes becoming olive-brown, no color change when injured, infrequently developing light brown discoloration when old; pale pinkish tan dots and pinkish cloudy drops of liquid may be present; tube layer up to 1cm thick, adnate or slightly depressed at stem when old, extending thinly 0.1-0.2(1)cm down stem, yellow, (Palm for S. neoalbidipes), whitish at first, becoming yellow when mature, unchanging when bruised, (Bessette for S. neoalbidipes)
STEM  2.5-7cm x 1-2cm, nearly equal or narrowing in either direction, solid; white to pale yellow, staining brown when handled; dry, "with dense dark brown to black glandular dots and smears"; partial veil not forming annulus^, (Bessette), 4-11cm x 1-2cm at top, equal, solid; white to "marguerite yellow" to "primrose yellow" to occasionally "pale pinkish buff", unchanging when old; dry, "densely colored with irregularly shaped glandulae which are colored dark brown to black, and often stain dark brown when handled"; white mycelium at base; no annulus, (Smith), 3-6cm x 0.7-1.6(2)cm at top, round in cross-section, mostly equal but may be slightly wider or narrower at base; yellowish white when young, becoming yellow, usually developing reddish brown to brown color; covered with small pale dots that are most conspicuous in upper 1/3 to 1/2, dots darkening when old and on drying, basal part may be inconspicuously striate, "base usually with whitish to yellowish appressed mycelium", (Palm for S. neoalbidipes), solid; white, becoming yellowish near top and brownish near base; dry, lacking dots at first, with brownish dots when old; partial veil and annulus absent, (Bessette for S. neoalbidipes)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith, Palm)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes, remove gluten, (Bessette), recently reported as toxic (McKnight, 1987, for S. neoalbidipes)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under pine^ (Bessette), type gregarious to cespitose [in tufts] in humus under scrubby Lodgepole Pine (Pinus contorta) in pygmy forest, (Smith), near 2-needle, 3-needle, or 5-needle pines, (Palm for Suillus neoalbidipes), single, scattered, or in groups in sandy soil under pines, (Bessette for S. neoalbidipes)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette), dark brown when moist, deep yellowish brown to dark yellowish brown when dry, (Palm for S. neoalbidipes), yellow-brown (Bessette for S. neoalbidipes), dull reddish brown (McKnight for S. neoalbidipes)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-9(12) x 3-4 um, cylindric to subelliptic [nearly elliptic], smooth, pale yellow^, (Bessette), spores 6-9(12) x 3-4 um, cylindric to subelliptic, smooth, colorless to pale ochraceous in KOH, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 23-28 x 5-8 um, clavate, colorless, content often granulose in KOH; pleurocystidia very rare, found only near tube mouths, 30-50 x 7-12 um, fasciculate, (no single ones seen), basal part staining dark brown revived in KOH, apical part typically staying colorless, contents sometimes staining brownish, cheilocystidia very abundant, completely occupying pore margin, similar in size and shape to pleurocystidia, dark brown in KOH; cap cuticle a broad (330 um) layer of interwoven hyphae, gelatinous, contents of hyphae appearing brownish granulose in KOH, outermost hyphae often somewhat enlarged and incrusted; surface of stem a gelatinous layer with numerous fascicles of darkly staining caulocystidia similar to the pleurocystidia; clamp connections absent, (Smith), spores 6-10 x 2-3 um, elliptic, to fusiform [spindle-shaped] to somewhat oval, strong yellow with some strong yellowish brown in Melzer's, "light greenish yellow in KOH"; basidia 4-spored, 16-20 x 3-6 um, mostly clavate, pale greenish yellow in KOH; pleurocystidia infrequent to rare, 20-45 x 5-10 um, narrowly clavate to clavate, mainly near bases of tubes, incrusted, cheilocystidia 19-65 x 4-11 um, "mostly narrow clavate to clavate, in large, often coalesced clusters", colorless to brown, brown-incrusted at base and often around cluster; cap cuticle a collapsed ixotrichodermium of partially or strongly gelatinized hyphae, 2-5 um wide, "small granules scattered on hyphal surfaces"; clamp connections not observed, (Palm for S. neoalbidipes)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'having glandules (small glands) on the stem' (referring to the glandular dots and smears)^, (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Suillus granulatus has a bald cap margin rarely with a minute tomentum on the immature cap margin, large clusters of caulocystidia, and numerous clusters of pleurocystidia, and Suillus brevipes has a bald cap margin, small clusters of caulocystidia, and numerous clusters of pleurocystidia, whereas S. neoalbidipes has a distinct band of cottony tissue on the margin of young caps, small clusters of caulocystidia, and rare to few clusters of pleurocystidia, (Palm). See also SIMILAR section of Suillus albivelatus, Suillus granulatus, Suillus luteus, Suillus pallidiceps, Suillus pseudobrevipes, and Suillus quiescens.
SOURCES  Smith(34), Bessette(3)*, Nguyen(3), Both(1), Redhead(5) (as S. albidipes), Palm(1) (as S. neoalbidipes), McKnight(1)* (as S. neoalbidipes), Grund(11) (as S. albidipes)
75
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus 'granulatus'  (L.) Roussel^  Fl. Calvados: 34. 1796  sensu N. American authors;  Suillus weaverae (A.H. Sm. & Shaffer) Kretzer & T.D. Bruns  (proposed current name invalid);  Suillus weaverae (A.H. Sm. & Shaffer) H. Engel & Klofac  (proposed current name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  dotted-stalk Suillus, milk bolete, granulated bolete, granulated slippery-jack, dotted-stalked slippery-jack, weeping bolete
NOTES  Features of North American Suillus 'granulatus' include 1) viscid to glutinous cap that is whitish, tan, brown, cinnamon, or orange-cinnamon, 2) whitish to yellowish pores that may stain dull cinnamon, 3) whitish to pale yellow flesh that does not turn blue, 4) whitish to yellowish stem with conspicuous pinkish tan to brown dots, 5) absent veil, and 6) growth under soft pines (most of them 5-needled).^ |What we are describing is what North American authors have been calling Suillus granulatus. Smith(34) described it based on Michigan material. Nguyen(3) recommended the name Suillus weaverae for this, based on the fact that Suillus weaverae fell in the middle of the clade occupied by what North American authors have been calling Suillus granulatus in Minnesota and eastern North America. For now we are called it Suillus 'granulatus'. North American Suillus 'granulatus' (which associates with soft pines) is not genetically close to European Suillus granulatus (which associates with hard pines) in the work of Nguyen(3). |There is not yet clear evidence that either Suillus 'granulatus' as we are describing it or the true European Suillus granulatus occurs in the Pacific Northwest, although identifications have been made (see Range). Another candidate for these observations would be Suillus subalpinus, which is in a clade close to Suillus 'granulatus' in Nguyen(3) and grows with 5-needled pines. It has been sequenced from Wyoming (type), Washington, Oregon, Montana, and California (D. Miller, pers. comm.). The holotype of Suillus flavogranulatus is said to be Suillus lakei, but its description is not similar to Suillus lakei and somewhat resembles Suillus 'granulatus'. Other somewhat similar species thought to be closely related by Smith(34) are Suillus pungens and Suillus acerbus which grow under Monterey (3-needled) pine in California. In Smith(36) they said Suillus punctatipes is to all practical purposes, a Suillus granulatus with a boletinoid configuration of the tube mouths. RANGE ^Suillus 'granulatus' is found in eastern Canada south to SC, west to CA and the Pacific Northwest, (Bessette). It was collected from ID. For the Smith(36) study they studied 3 collections of S. punctatipes and 10 collections of S. granulatus. It has also been recorded from WA and OR, (vouchered at the University of Washington), MI (Smith(34)), NS, and NC, (Lincoff(2)). It has been reported from BC (in Redhead). Collections in the Nguyen(3) study included collections from MI and MN (as S. granulatus), and NH and PA (as S. weaverae).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle stains dark olive to olive-gray with application of KOH and bluish gray with FeSO4, flesh stains pink then pinkish brown with KOH and olive gray with application of FeSO4; stem surface purplish brown with application of KOH and dark green with FeSO4; pore surface instantly rusty orange then rapidly purplish brown with application of KOH, olive green with FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  5-12cm, broadly convex; pale yellow or some shade of tan, brown, cinnamon, or orangish cinnamon; viscid to glutinous and often streaked or checkered when fresh; margin even when young and when mature^, (Bessette), 5-11(15)cm, becoming broadly convex; bald or streaked or spotted with "cinnamon" (Ridgway color) on a pale buff ground color, when old more or less cinnamon overall, "immature specimens often pallid for a long time", some fully developed caps almost dingy white; viscid to glutinous when wet, tends to become spotted from aggregations of gluten, often minutely areolate [cracked like dried mud] when old; margin bald to minutely tomentose, (Smith(34)), convex to flat or slightly wavy; "cinnamon-brown to brown, orange-brown, rusty-cinnamon, or yellow-brown (but in some forms whitish when young)", (Arora), margin bald, rarely with a minute tomentum on margins of immature caps, (Palm)
FLESH  white to pale yellow, not turning blue when cut or bruised^, (Bessette), soft; whitish when young but soon pale yellow, unchanging, "with a watery green line above the tubes"; in stem white at first but soon bright yellow at top, tinged cinnamon toward base, (Smith(34))
PORES  1 per mm, irregular; whitish to pinkish buff when young, soon yellowish, staining dull cinnamon when old or when bruised, sometimes unchanging; tube layer 0.4-1cm thick^, (Bessette), about 2 per mm, or in old caps 1 per mm and somewhat boletinoid [radially arranged] to merely elongated; pale honey yellowish, when old brownish spotted, "staining dingy cinnamon when bruised, in very young stages beaded with droplets of a cloudy liquid"; tube layer about 1cm thick, adnate-subdecurrent, "pallid at first, but soon pale yellow becoming dingy yellow, not staining when bruised", (Smith(34)), whitish when very young, "soon becoming buff or yellow and eventually dingy yellowish or brownish-spotted when mature", (Arora)
STEM  4-8cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal, solid; whitish when young, becoming yellowish when old especially at top; "with conspicuous pinkish tan to brownish glandular dots and smears; partial veil and annulus absent"^, (Bessette), 4-8cm x 1-2(2.5)cm at top, "equal or narrowed to a point at base, solid"; whitish but soon bright yellow in upper part, "pallid downward but base becoming dingy cinnamon"; "covered over all by pinkish tan to vinaceous brown glandular dots; veil none", (Smith(34) who also comment that stem is white at first with vinaceous spots and smears over the apex and it gradually becomes yellow, nearly lemon yellow at times, and some specimens change to this color slowly after handling), (Smith(34)), whitish when young, becoming yellow in upper part and dingy cinnamon-stained or reddish stained toward base; "covered with pinkish to reddish-tan or brown glandular dots and smears in age", (Arora), dots on stem exude milky droplets (Phillips)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild to slightly fragrant (Smith(34)), pleasant, slightly acid, fruity, (Lincoff(1))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild to acid (cap cuticle) (Smith(34))
EDIBILITY  edible, but note that a few people develop contact dermatitis with swelling and itchy rash on handling this species, (Bessette), occasionally gastric upset has resulted (Miller)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on the ground under pines^, (Bessette), scattered to gregarious under pine (Smith(34)), especially under 5-needle white pines; late spring, summer, and fall, (Miller), spring, summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette), dingy cinnamon to cinnamon (Smith(34)), brown to dull cinnamon or ocher (Arora), dingy cinnamon to red-brown (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 2.5-3.5 um, oblong or tapered slightly to apex, pale brown^, (Bessette), spores 7-9(10) x 2.5-3.5 um, oblong or tapered slightly to the apex, smooth, yellowish in Melzer's reagent and KOH; basidia 4-spored, 18-24 x 5-6 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia "in bundles with brown incrusted material around base", individually 36-50 x 7-9 um, clavate to subcylindric, colorless or with yellowish to brown content, cheilocystidia similar; cap epicutis a gelatinous trichodermium of hyphae 4-7 um wide, "in KOH the content dingy ochraceous to bister, some encrusting material present in the layer"; caulocystidia "40-70 x 7-10 um, clavate, subfusoid or cylindric, mostly with colored content, bases of clusters surrounded by brown pigment", content of cystidia colorless to colored and mostly coagulated, "incrusting pigment present over much of caulohymenium"; clamp connections absent, (Smith(34))
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin, "dotted"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Suillus brevipes has a glutinous reddish brown cap and short stem that lacks glandular dots or has sparse glandular dots when old, (Bessette). |Suillus punctatipes is larger and thicker-stemmed with larger pores and a somewhat different range of cap color (orange-brown to dark brown, dingy tan, pinkish brown, gray, vinaceous gray, or purple-tinged), (Arora). Suillus neoalbidipes has a distinct band of cottony tissue on the margin of young caps, small clusters of caulocystidia, and rare to few clusters of pleurocystidia, whereas S. granulatus has a bald cap margin rarely with a minute tomentum on the immature cap margin, large clusters of caulocystidia, and numerous clusters of pleurocystidia, (Palm). Suillus glandulosipes has a conspicuous cottony roll on the margin when young, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Smith(34), Smith(35), Smith(36), Bessette(3)*, Phillips(1)*, Miller(14)*, Arora(1), Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Ammirati(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Redhead(5), Palm(1), AroraPocket(1)*, Nguyen(3), Marrone(1)*
76
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus imbellus  (Trappe) Kretzer & T.D. Bruns^  Mycologia 89(4): 589. 1997;  Gastrosuillus imbellus  (Trappe) Thiers  Mem. N.Y. bot. Gdn 49: 358. 1989;  Gastroboletus imbellus  Trappe  Brittonia 21: 249-251. 1969
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Also listed in Truffles etc. category. There is doubt about whether this is a distinct species - it is thought to be a distorted Suillus punctatipes. Suillus imbellus is characterized by 1) drab color, 2) persistent hanging veil remnants on cap margin, 3) short tubes oriented at an angle to vertical, 4) pores mostly blocked by folds and outgrowths of wall tissue, 5) short laterally attached stem-columella, 6) pungent-farinaceous odor, 7) slightly bitter taste, and 8) formation under the soil surface.^ | The current name in the online Species Fungorum, accessed April 20, 2020, was Suillus imbellus, with Gastrosuillus imbellus and Gastroboletus imbellus as synonyms. MycoBank, accessed the same day gave all three names as obligate or homotypic synonyms, without specifying a current name. The description is derived from Thiers(7) unless otherwise specified. RANGE ^Suillus imbellus is endemic to OR and known from a single site there, (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^with 5% KOH, tube mouths turn dark brown, bases deep lilac, flesh near cap surface deep lilac
CAP  5cm across, convex, expanded, bolete-like in appearance except for lateral attachment of cap to stem; grayish yellow ground color, overlain by dark olivaceous fibrils to produce overall sordid gray appearance; moist but not viscid, cap surface with a few broad cracks that extend deeply into flesh, which is blushed rose where exposed in this way; margin with hanging ragged membranous veil remnants from a 0.2-0.3cm wide extension of the cap surface
FLESH  2cm thick at attachment of stem, soft; "white with scattered pale yellow stained areas", a rosy zone above the tubes and a 0.2cm thick olive-hygrophanous zone under the cap surface, "slowly and erratically staining light sordid brownish where cut"; in stem pallid with vinaceous blush near base and turning slowly sordid when cut
PORES  gleba (spore producing tissue) exposed and tubulose; pores 1-4 per mm, round, mostly blocked by folds and outgrowths of wall tissue; tubes oriented at about 40 degrees from vertical, decurrent, short (not over 0.2cm long), pale grayish olive
STEM  stem-columella 3cm long, 1.5cm at apex, equal except narrowing slightly at base, laterally attached to cap; dull yellowish at top, grading to sordid cream in middle part, to pale salmonaceous with copious dark brown stains at base; dry at top, "upper half with dark brown to blackish glandular dots which are minute singly but often coalesced into patches up to one-half mm broad"
ODOR  pungent-farinaceous
TASTE  slightly bitter
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single under Tsuga mertensiana and Abies amabilis, midsummer, (Thiers), "sporocarps beneath the soil surface associated with the roots of Abies grandis, A. lasiocarpa, Tsuga mertensiana, with an understory of Antennaria lanata, Fragaria sp., Pachistima myrsinites, Sorbus sitchensis, and Vaccinium sp. at 1,650m elevation", (Castellano), summer
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 2.5 um, narrowly to broadly elliptic to obovate, smooth, pale yellow in Melzer's reagent, colorless in KOH, most with 1 or 2 large droplets and often with several smaller ones^; basidia 20-30 x 3-5(7) um, colorless in KOH, brachybasidioles similar to basidia but shorter; cystidia 25-60 x 4-6 um, fascicled, colorless to vinaceous to dark brown in KOH "with much brown, amorphous material deposited at the base of the clusters, cylindric to fusoid-ventricose or irregularly constricted"; epicutis of peridium in KOH of granulated pale brownish, thin-walled hyphae 2-6 um wide, subcutis similar except hyphae 5-12 um wide and much yellowish to pale vinaceous debris present, in Melzer's reagent epicuticular hyphae are yellowish and subcuticular hyphae more or less vinaceous stained; orange-brown pigment balls scattered throughout; clamp connections absent
NAME ORIGIN  means "not beautiful" (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Suillus pungens of California is also drab in color and unpleasant in odor and taste, but has normal tubes and pores, (Thiers).
SOURCES  Thiers(7) (as Gastroboletus), Castellano(1) (as Gastroboletus), Both(1) (as Gastroboletus)
77
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus lakei  (Murrill) A.H. Sm. and Thiers^  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.34-36. 1964
ENGLISH NAME(S)  western painted Suillus, western painted bolete, Lake's slipperycap, Lake's bolete, matte jack
NOTES  Features include 1) a somewhat viscid cap covered until old with dry dark brown to reddish brown or orange brown scales and fibrils, 2) yellowish flesh that may stain weakly blue-green in stem base, 3) large yellow to yellow-brown, often radially elongated pores that stain brownish or reddish when bruised, 4) stem that may be obscurely reticulate and typically lacks dots, yellowish above the thin whitish to yellowish membranous annulus and yellowish to brownish below it (often like the cap), and 5) growth under Douglas-fir.^ | Suillus lakei var. pseudopictus has a redder and more scaly cap with larger scales. Suillus lakei is common in the Pacific Northwest. |"Laessoe(3) say that Suillus amabilis, a Colorado spruce species, is an older synonym of Suillus lakei. Nguyen(3) only had one purported Suillus amabilis sequence, from Washington, which sequenced to be the same as Suillus lakei, but we will need a type collection or Colorado type area collections of Suillus amabilis to investigate this further." RANGE ^It is found in the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Northwest, south to CA, (Bessette). It has been reported from BC (in Redhead), and from MT (L. Evans, pers. comm.). Var. lakei is found in the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Northwest including WA, OR, ID, and WY, (Smith). Var. pseudopictus is found in the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Northwest, south to California and also reported from NJ and NY, (Bessette). The range of var. pseudopictus includes WA and CA, (Smith).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  6-15.5cm, convex, becoming broadly convex to flat when old; fibrils orange-buff to reddish or brownish on pale yellow to pale orange ground color, dry to slightly viscid, fibrillose to floccose-scaly, becoming nearly bald when old; margin typically appendiculate [with hanging veil remnants], var. pseudopictus "covered with a dense layer of conspicuous, flattened to somewhat erect, brick-red to reddish brown fibrils and scales"^, (Bessette), 6-15(20)cm, flat-convex, becoming broadly convex to flat or with margin uplifted; ground color pale yellow when young and dingy ochraceous when old, at first with superficial reddish to orange-buff or brownish scales, surface usually appearing somewhat streaky; viscid beneath the scales, finally becoming more or less bald, (Smith), "reddish-brown to brick-red to pinkish or tawny fibrils or fibrillose scales on a yellow to dingy orange or tan background", (Arora)
FLESH  "yellowish, unchanging or staining pinkish when exposed", not turning blue in cap, but stem base of young specimens "usually staining weakly blue-green (mature specimens often do not stain)"^, (Bessette), thick; yellowish; in stem pallid yellowish when young, unchanging or staining greenish in lower part when injured (fresh material), base often more or less cinnamon brown when old and old specimens often not showing greenish or blue when injured, (Smith)
PORES  1-2.5mm, angular, often radially elongated, yellow to yellow-brown or ocher, "staining reddish to brown when bruised", not turning blue; tube layer 0.5-1.2cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), 1-2.5mm radially, when old large and angular, staining brownish when bruised; tube layer typically shallow (0.5-1cm thick), broadly adnate to decurrent, dingy ochraceous when young, (Smith)
STEM  6-12cm x 1-3cm, nearly equal or widening downward with a narrowed base, solid; yellow above the annulus, dull yellow to brownish below the annulus, sometimes with reddish streaks; dry, may be obscurely reticulate at top, typically lacking glandular dots; "partial veil floccose, whitish to yellowish, usually leaving a thin superior annulus"^, (Bessette), 6-12cm x 1-4cm at top, widening downward and then narrowing at base, solid; bright yellow above annulus and yellow below it but soon brownish from handling, or glandular dots present; superior thin membranous annulus (or veil remnants), (Smith), 3-8(12)cm x 1-3(4)cm, more or less equal, dry, solid; yellow above ring, usually with reddish to brown streaks in lower part; veil "white or becoming cap color, dry, usually forming a fibrillose ring or ragged zone on stalk, but sometimes disappearing", (Arora), younger specimens bruise slightly green or bluish, (Phillips)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), none (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), none (Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under conifers, especially Douglas-fir^, (Bessette), scattered to gregarious, typically associated with Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), (Smith), prefers poor, exposed soil and often on roadbanks or in campgrounds, (Arora), confined to Douglas-fir (Thiers), spring, summer, and fall, (Miller), spring, summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull cinnamon^ (Bessette, Smith), cinnamon-brown to olive-brown (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-11 x 3-4 um, subelliptic to slightly ventricose, smooth, pale yellow^, (Bessette), spores (7)8-10(11) x 3-3.7(4) um, subelliptic to subcylindric to slightly ventricose, smooth, yellowish to pale tawny in Melzer's reagent, colorless to pale greenish yellow in KOH, thin-walled; basidia 2-spored and 4-spored, 28-36 x 10-12 um, clavate, colorless; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia numerous to abundant, 48-60 x 7-9 um, cylindric, typically incrusted and staining dark brown in KOH, occasionally colorless, thin-walled, more often single along the sides of tubes but fascicled along tube mouths; cap cuticle "differentiated as an inner layer of gelatinous interwoven hyphae and an outer layer of incrusted to smooth hyphae which stain brownish-ochraceous in KOH"; clamp connections absent to very rare, (Smith), spores 8-11 x 3-4 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  after American mycologist E.R. Lake^ (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Suillus caerulescens has flesh in the stem base that stains blue-green more strongly, even in mature specimens, and cap is smoother and stickier, (Bessette). Suillus ponderosus can be difficult to distinguish if annulus is obliterated (colors overlap), but it is massive, with the cap practically bald and noticeably viscid, whereas Suillus lakei is not always strongly viscid and cap is scaly until older, (Smith). The holotype of Suillus flavogranulatus A.H. Sm., Thiers, and O.K. Mill. Lloydia 28: 127-128. 1965 nests within Suillus lakei in the molecular study of Nguyen(3) so that its status as a species is questionable, despite the descriptions in Smith(36) and Bessette(3). The cap of Suillus flavogranulatus was abundant in one Idaho locality in 1964: the cap was described as bald, the cap color pallid becoming pale yellow to pale ochraceous, and the stem as "white, slowly becoming yellow and with numerous pinkish brown glandular dots" over the upper two thirds, the stem base slowly pinkish brown when cut, (Smith(36) who first thought it was a color variation of Suillus granulatus with abnormally large tube mouths). See also SIMILAR section of Suillus ampliporus.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Smith(34), Arora(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Ammirati(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Miller(14)*, Sept(1)*, Redhead(5), Thiers(11), AroraPocket(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Nguyen(3), Smith(36) (regarding Suillus flavogranulatus), Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*, Laessoe(3)
78
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus luteus  (L.) Roussel^ Fl. Calvados: 34. 1796
ENGLISH NAME(S)  slippery-jack, slippery jack
NOTES  Features include 1) smooth, viscid to glutinous cap that is red-brown to yellow-brown, 2) unchanging flesh and pores that are white to pale yellow, 3) conspicuous whitish sheathing annulus which is often viscid or with a lavender band or layer externally, 4) prominent glandular dots during all stages on a white to pale yellow upper stem, and 5) growth under conifers.^ | "Suillus luteus is the most widespread species in the world, occurring in the Northern and Southern Hemisphere. It is native to Europe, where it associates with P. sylvestris and P. nigra, but it has also been introduced into North and South America, Asia, and Australasia with P. sylvestris"; it has been recorded with several other pine species internationally, (Nguyen). RANGE ^Suillus luteus is widely distributed through North America (Bessette). The exact range is uncertain because the name has been applied to almost any Suillus with an annulus, (Smith(34)), and Smith(36) noted in 1965 "In the light of our more restricted concept of S. luteus its presence in the Pacific Northwest needs further verification." It was found in MI (Smith(34) in 1964), and has been reported from BC (in Redhead), WA, OR, (both vouchered at University of Washington and at Oregon State University), ID (K. Chadwick, pers. comm.; vouchered at Oregon State University), CA (Thiers), NS (Grund), and also Europe and Asia (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle dull dark gray with application of KOH, grayish olive with FeSO4; flesh pinkish then pale blue-gray with KOH, grayish blue to olive with application of FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  5-12cm, rounded, becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old; "dark reddish brown to cinnamon-brown, yellow-brown or ochre"; "smooth, viscid to glutinous when moist, often shiny when dry"; margin appendiculate [with hanging veil remnants]^, (Bessette), 5-12cm, hemispheric to obtuse at first, broadly convex to flat when old; "raw sienna" to "Sudan brown" (Ridgway colors) or tawny to bister (color variable in yellow-brown to red-brown series); bald and viscid but at times somewhat streaked under gluten, cap pellicle separable, (Smith(34)), typically reddish brown to dark reddish brown or chestnut-brown, but ranging sometimes toward yellow-brown or rusty-brown, especially when old, and sometime streaked, (Arora), with a slight umbo at times; violet highlights in damp weather (Lincoff(1))
FLESH  "white to pale yellow, not staining blue when cut or bruised"^, (Bessette), white or tinted pale yellow especially near tubes and stem; in stem colored as surface or whitish, (Smith(34)), white or pale yellow, often slightly pinky toward stem, (Phillips)
PORES  1-2 per mm, angular; "whitish to pale yellow when very young", yellow to dark yellow or olive-yellow when old, unchanging when bruised; tube layer 0.4-1.5cm thick^, (Bessette), 3 per mm, when old 1-2 per mm, yellow at first but becoming dark dotted, surface with a sheen; tubes 0.3-0.7cm thick, gradually shorter toward cap margin, adnate to subdecurrent, 'at first whitish to pale yellow, at length "honey yellow" to "old gold"' (Ridgway colors), unchanging when cut, (Smith(34)), tubes same color as pores (Arora)
STEM  3-8cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal, solid; white when young, becoming pale yellow at top and "often developing dingy purplish or brownish tones" toward the base when old; with glandular dots and smears at least above annulus; partial veil "white, with dull purple to purplish gray tones on the underside, forming an often large and flaring or sleeve-like annulus that is white with purple or dark purple tones and is gelatinous in humid weather"^, (Bessette), (3)4-8cm x 1-2.5cm, equal or narrowing at base, solid; pale yellow above annulus; glandular dotted above the annulus and beneath the sheath, typically peronate [sheathed] by "whitish veil up to the membranous often reflexed, rather persistent annulus", "veil membranous and with a gelatinous purplish zone on the under side or outer surface in humid weather, or exterior layer of sheath purplish gray in age", (Smith(34)), pinkish to brown glandular dots and smears (Arora), pale yellow dots that turn reddish brown (Lincoff(1))
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith(34))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), pleasant (Smith(34))
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette), some people are apparently "allergic" to it, (Arora), may cause transient diarrhea if slime not removed, (Lincoff(2))^, good after removing cuticle and drying, although some experience diarrhea, (Lincoff(1))
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground near or under pine, spruce, and mixed conifers^, (Bessette), scattered to gregarious under conifers, (Smith(34)), summer and fall (Miller), occasionally spring, mainly fall, (Bacon), spring, summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^, (Bessette), '"sayal brown" to "clay color" dull cinnamon when moisture has escaped' (Ridgway colors), (Smith(34)), brown to dull cinnamon (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  "spores 7-9 x 2.5-3 um, nearly oblong, smooth, pale brown"^, (Bessette), spores 7-9 x 2.5-3 um, smooth, with pronounced colorless sheath, more or less oblong, inamyloid, nearly colorless in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 14-18 x 4-5 um, yellowish in KOH; pleurocystidia "in scattered to rare bundles surrounded by bister debris", "when isolated 20-35 X 5-7 um and narrowly clavate, content usually bister as revived in KOH", cheilocystidia "similar, but tube edges often a mass of bister incrustation obscuring the cystidia"; cap cuticle of gelatinous filaments 2-4 um wide, forming a tangled trichodermium, colorless in KOH and pale yellowish in Melzer's reagent; stem with numerous fascicles of caulocystidia, the clusters bister in KOH; clamp connections not seen, (Smith(34)), spores 7-10 x 3-3.5 um, (Lincoff(1))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'yellow' (Latin)
SIMILAR  Suillus pseudobrevipes lacks glandular dots, and has broader hyphae in the cap trichodermium, (Smith(34)). Suillus clintonianus grows under larch, has brighter colors, and the underside of the annulus is ochraceous instead of purple or grayish purple, (Smith(34)). Suillus glandulosipes [as Suillus neoalbidipes] which has also has no annular remnant can look similar to those specimens of S. luteus in which the veil separates from the stem leaving cottony patches of tissue hanging from the cap margin, (Smith(34)). Suillus borealis has no annulus, it has a vinaceous-red reaction in the stem base where larval damage is extensive, and the glandular dots slowly become readily visible, (Smith(36)). Suillus acidus is somewhat similar but has black viscid dots on the stem below the annulus which has a distinctive band-like form, (Ammirati as Suillus subolivaceus). Suillus flavidus is somewhat similar (Ammirati).
SOURCES  Smith(34), Smith(36), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Thiers(1), Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Ammirati(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Redhead(5), Breitenbach(3)*, Grund(11), Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*, Nguyen(3), McAdoo(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
79
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus ochraceoroseus  (Snell) Singer^  Persoonia 7(2): 319. 1973;  Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus  (Snell) Pomerl. & A.H. Sm.;  Boletinus ochraceoroseus  Snell
ENGLISH NAME(S)  rosy larch bolete, rosy bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly cap that is rose red to pink, 2) pale yellow flesh that is unchanging or turns slightly blue when cut, 3) large radially arranged pores that are yellow to ocher and do not turn blue, 4) a membranous veil adhering to the cap margin when young, and 5) growth under larch.^ RANGE ^Suillus ochraceoroseus is found in the northern Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Northwest (Bessette), WA, OR, and ID, (Lincoff), and BC (Schalkwijk-Barendsen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  8-20cm, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat, margin incurved at first, becoming downcurved and sometimes uplifted when old; covered with pink to rosy red or dark red to dull red fibrils and scales, usually overlaid with buff fibrils when young, often bright yellow along margin; dry, margin appendiculate with hanging veil remnants^, (Bessette), 8-15(25)cm, convex to broadly convex and somewhat umbonate, becoming flat or nearly so, or margin slightly uplifted; color variable, often lemon yellow along margin and pinkish beneath scales on disc, at times rose pink to brick-red with little or no yellow, or at times whitish from dense fibrils; dry, often uneven or pitted, fibrillose to fibrillose-squamulose, the scales sometimes erect over disc but usually appressed toward margin; margin usually with hanging veil remnants when young, (Smith)
FLESH  pale yellow, unchanging or turning slightly blue when cut^, (Bessette), thick, soft; yellow, unchanging when bruised or a very slight change to bluish or greenish blue, (Smith)
PORES  angular to elongated, boletinoid to sublamellate [somewhat gill-like], yellow to ocher, becoming olive-ocher to brownish; tube layer 0.3-0.6cm thick^, (Bessette), about 2-5mm x 1-2mm, elongated to mostly angular, radially arranged to somewhat gill-like, compound; tube layer about 0.5cm thick, adnate to decurrent, bright straw-yellow to dull olive-ocher and finally dingy brown, (Smith), not bruising blue (Arora)
STEM  3-6cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal or enlarged at either end, solid; yellow, often with reddish or brownish stains toward base; dry, partial veil submembranous (somewhat membranous), grayish to yellowish, often adhering to cap margin, sometimes leaving a ring, reticulate above the ring^, (Bessette), 3-5 x 1-3cm, nearly equal, the base often somewhat bulbous and top frequently flared; nearly colored as tubes, "more sordid and often reddish at base or at times brownish"; unpolished or fibrillose below annulus, usually reticulate in upper part from decurrent tubes; veil thin and submembranous [somewhat membranous], pallid to yellowish, sometimes forming fleeting annulus but usually adhering to cap margin, (Smith), base often whitish and fibrillose (Arora)
ODOR  somewhat acidic to unpleasant^ (Bessette), acidulous (Smith)
TASTE  slightly acrid [peppery] to bitter^ (Bessette), very slightly peppery, bitterish in cooked material, (Smith)
EDIBILITY  inedible because of bitter taste (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups under larch in conifer woods, August to October^, (Bessette), mostly late spring and summer (Trudell)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark reddish brown to purplish brown^, (Bessette), dark vinaceous brown (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 2.5-3.5 um, subcylindric [nearly cylindric], smooth, yellowish^, (Bessette), spores 7.5-9.5 x 2.5-3.2 um, nearly cylindric, smooth, a few dextrinoid, nearly colorless to yellowish in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 28-34 x 4.5-5.5 um, narrowly clavate to subcylindric; pleurocystidia scattered to abundant, 46-58 x 6-8 um, subcylindric to subventricose, obtuse to abruptly acute, colorless in KOH, thin-walled, often flexuous [wavy], cheilocystidia similar to pleurocystidia (35-40 um long) and at times in clusters; cap cuticle of compactly interwoven hyphae; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'ochraceous - rosy'
SIMILAR  Other boletes under larch include Suillus ampliporus, Suillus clintonianus, and Suillus elbensis.
SOURCES  Smith(35) (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus), Bessette(3)* (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus), Trudell(4)*, Miller(14)*, Arora(1)* (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus), Phillips(1)* (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus), Lincoff(2)* (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus), McKnight(1)* (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus), Ammirati(1)* (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus), Marrone(1)*, McAdoo(1)* (as Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus)
80
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus pallidiceps  A.H. Sm. and Thiers^  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.96-97. 1964
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a bald glutinous cap that is whitish, then pale yellow, then cinnamon buff, 2) white to yellow flesh, 3) white to yellowish pores, 4) white stem without dots or annulus, and 5) microscopic characters. Suillus brevipes has a darker cap, and has smaller spores according to Smith(34), but Suillus pallidiceps could actually be a pale variation of Suillus brevipes.^ RANGE ^Suillus pallidiceps is found in ID (Smith, Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  3-8cm, convex becoming broadly convex; "white to whitish when young, slowly becoming pale yellow", and finally dull cinnamon-buff when old, staining waxed paper purplish brown; bald, glutinous, becoming minutely areolate [cracked like dried mud] beneath the gluten when old; margin typically with a narrow band of sterile tissue^, (Bessette), 3-8cm, convex to broadly convex; "whitish at first, slowly becoming pale yellow and finally discoloring to a dull cinnamon buff, not staining where handled, but in contact with wax paper staining purplish umber"; bald, copiously glutinous, when old minutely areolate [cracked like dried mud] beneath gluten; "margin naked but extending slightly beyond the tubes", (Smith)
FLESH  white to yellow, unchanging when exposed^, (Bessette), white then yellowish, unchanging when cut; in stem white at first, lemon yellow in top when old, margins of larval tunnels merely ochraceous brownish, (Smith)
PORES  2-3 per mm, circular to angular; whitish at first, soon yellowish to yellow, unchanging when bruised; tube layer about 1cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), 2-3 per mm, pale yellow and unchanging when bruised; tube layer about 1cm thick, adnate to short-decurrent, yellow, slowly becoming dingy ochraceous when old, (Smith)
STEM  2.5-7cm x 1.2-1.6cm, nearly equal or widening downward, sometimes with bulbous base, solid; white, top yellow when old; dry, glandular dots absent or inconspicuous; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 1-2cm x 1.2-1.6cm [sic], bulbous at base and up to 2.5cm, solid; pure white; bald; no veil, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under Lodgepole Pine [Pinus contorta]^, (Bessette), type gregarious under Pinus contorta (Smith)
SPORE DEPOSIT  pale cinnamon^ (Bessette, Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 3.5-4 um, oblong, smooth, yellowish^, (Bessette), spores 8-11 x 3.5-4.2 um, oblong, smooth, yellow to pale tan in Melzer's reagent, nearly colorless in KOH, relatively thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 18-24 x 5-6 um, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia "20-30 x 5-8 um, fusoid-ventricose, often the neck 1.5-2.5 um thick and 8-9 um long", only a slight amount of nearly colorless incrusting pigment around the bases or none, cystidial contents colorless, cheilocystidia in fascicles, 40-55 x 5-8 um individually, cylindric to narrowly clavate, typically with coagulated yellowish content or colorless as revived in KOH, bases of clusters surrounded by dingy pale yellowish brown amorphous material as revived in KOH; cap epicutis of appressed-interwoven (rather tangled) gelatinous hyphae 2-3.5(5) um wide, and with some colorless granular content, the inner layer dingy ochraceous in KOH and subcutis dark yellow brown; caulocystidia 40-65 x 7-10 um, narrowly clavate to cylindric and often crooked (rarely varying to fusoid-ventricose), colorless or with colored coagulated content evenly distributed or in particles, the caulocystidia in fascicles as revived in KOH surrounded by dark brown incrusted amorphous pigment at base of cluster, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means "with pallid cap"^, (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Suillus brevipes has a darker cap, and has smaller spores, (Smith). Suillus glandulosipes [as Suillus neoalbidipes] has a roll of cottony material along the cap margin when young, (Smith). Suillus placidus is similar but has conspicuous pinkish tan glandular dots and smears, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Smith(34), Bessette(3), Phillips(1)*, Both(1)
81
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus 'placidus'  (Bonord.) Singer^  Farlowia 2: 42. 1945
ENGLISH NAME(S)  white Suillus
NOTES  Features include 1) a cap that is whitish at first, with gluten that darkens when old and in drying, 2) white to yellow flesh that stains pale vinaceous, 3) whitish to yellowish, angular to irregular pores, 4) slender, white to yellow stem with conspicuous pinkish tan smears and dots that become reddish brown or darker when old, 5) absence of a veil, and 6) growth under white pine.^ | The DNA study of Nguyen(3) shows Suillus placidus, Suillus subalpinus, and Suillus anomalus form one clade (although a seemingly separate clade with Suillus weaverae and North American Suillus 'granulatus' is nested.) Type material was not sequenced, so that it is unclear exactly how the names apply. They comment, "Suillus placidus has a white pileus that does not change color as the specimen ages; the species was described from Germany but is strictly associated with introduced North American P. strobus (Bonorden 1861). It is thought that this species was introduced to Europe with its North American P. strobus host. Suillus subalpinus is a high-altitude species that associates with soft pines. Suillus anomalus has pores that continue down the stipe, and although it morphologically appears to be distinct, its ITS sequence was not." RANGE ^in the Nguyen(3) study, Suillus placidus collections were included from Europe and the eastern United States (MA, NH, NY), 4 Suillus subalpinus collections from Montana and 1 from California, and a Suillus anomalus collection from Washington with a closely related sample from British Columbia. Other authors have reported as follows: Suillus placidus is found in eastern Canada south to NC, and SC, west to MN, and is also reported from WA, (Bessette). It is found specifically in ON, PQ, ME, MI, NH, NY, TN, and VT, and it is reported by Isaacs and Stuntz from WA, (Smith). Grund recorded it from NS. It also occurs in Europe (Breitenbach). Bessette(3) gives the range of Suillus subalpinus as Wyoming and of Suillus anomalus as California.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface stains pink, then dull red to blackish with application of KOH, flesh stains gray to olive-brown with application of FeSO4, (Bessette), cap surface and flesh instantly dingy vinaceous in KOH, (Smith)
CAP  3-9cm, obtuse to broadly convex, sometimes nearly flat when old; white or whitish when young, becoming yellowish when old; viscid, bald; margin even^, (Bessette), 3-10cm, broadly convex when young, sometimes becoming flat or with wavy margin; white to ivory white gradually becoming yellowish, finally pale lemon yellow, dingy olive when old and water-soaked, gluten often becoming grayish to blackish when old; bald, viscid to glutinous, surface often showing depressions as the soft flesh collapses; margin naked, (Smith), often slightly umbonate (Phillips)
FLESH  white to pale yellow, slowly staining pale vinaceous when exposed, not turning blue^, (Bessette), white but slowly turning yellow, "when cut slowly becoming pale vinaceous", in stem white but soon lemon yellow, (Smith)
PORES  1-2 mm wide when mature, angular to irregular, whitish at first, soon yellowish and pale ocher-yellow when old, "unchanging when bruised, often beaded with pinkish droplets when moist"; tube layer 0.3-0.8cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), 0.5mm at first, finally up to 1-2mm when old; '"pale cartridge buff" young (yellowish) near ocher yellow at maturity', "often beaded with pinkish droplets of an exudate and with pinkish glandulate [sic - ? glandulae] like those on the stipe"; tube layer 0.3-0.8cm thick, at first adnate to depressed around stem but soon decurrent, '"cartridge buff" young (pale buff), pale yellow at maturity (near "Naples yellow"), unchanging when injured', (colors in quotation marks from Ridgway), (Smith), pore surface "with drops of opalescent latex that on drying produce small spots varying from orange-yellow to reddish-brown", (Lincoff(1))
STEM  4-9cm x 0.6-1.2cm, nearly equal or narrowing in either direction, solid, sometimes hollow when old; white, becoming yellow when old; dry, "with conspicuous pinkish tan glandular dots and smears" that become reddish brown or darker when old; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), 4-12cm x (0.3)0.5-1.2(2.2)cm, equal, solid becoming hollow; 'white with "vinaceous buff" to "vinaceous fawn" smears and dots, ground color, yellow in age', the glandular areas discoloring to gray or blackish when dry; no veil at any stage, (Smith), "yellow at top, brown or pinkish lower down, where the droplets of dried latex form a purple ornamentation", (Lincoff(1))
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild to acidulous (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild (Smith)
EDIBILITY  edible (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under eastern white pine (Bessette, referring to eastern North America), reported from WA under white pine, (Smith)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull cinnamon^, (Bessette, Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 2.5-3.2 um, nearly oblong, smooth, yellowish^, (Bessette), spores 7-9 x 2.5-3.2 um, nearly oblong, smooth, a colorless sheath present, inamyloid, nearly colorless in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 24-28 x 6-7 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia 49-60 x 6-9 um, subcylindric to narrowly clavate, "scattered, numerous or rare, but typically in fascicles, often with bister content and dark brown amorphous pigment incrusting the bundle at the level of the hymenium", cheilocystidia "in larger aggregations, more capitate and darker colored as revived in KOH, but otherwise similar to pleurocystidia"; cap epicutis a collapsed trichodermium of gelatinous hyphae 3-6 um wide with bister content in KOH and Melzer's reagent, caulocystidia "numerous to abundant, often in fascicles similar to pleurocystidia or with more apical enlargement", content colorless to bister, mostly heavily incrusted with amorphous debris as revived in KOH; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin, "peaceful" or "placid"^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Suillus pallidiceps has a white to whitish cap that slowly becomes yellowish and finally cinnamon-buff when old, and lacks conspicuous glandular dots, (Bessette).
SOURCES  Smith(34), Bessette(3)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Breitenbach(3)*, Grund(11), Nguyen(3)
82
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus ponderosus  A.H. Sm. and Thiers^  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.38-40. 1964;  Suillus imitatus  A.H. Sm. & Trappe  var. viridescens  A.H. Sm. and Trappe
ENGLISH NAME(S)  heavy bolete, slimy fat-jack
NOTES  Features include 1) often massive size, 2) a viscid cap that lacks distinct scales and is yellow (especially when young) or reddish brown to vinaceous brown or cinnamon or with green tinges, 3) a cap margin with hanging veil remnants, 4) yellow flesh that is greenish in the stem base, 5) large, yellow pores that stain brownish, 6) a massive, yellow stem that is equal or narrows downward and stains rusty brown from handling, and 7) a membranous annulus often stained reddish cinnamon on the underside from a gelatinous outer layer.^ | Suillus imitatus var. viridescens is considered a synonym and has more conspicuous green tinges. The cap of the latter was described originally in Smith(10) as "by maturity at times showing dark green spots as if stung by an insect or flushed olive dark green over wide areas" and rarely the surface blackish green to dingy bluish green. The pore surface of var. viridescens was not described as turning blue or green but the stem surface was sometimes green apart from the apex and the stem flesh was sometimes green or blue when cut (Smith(10)). RANGE ^Suillus ponderosus is found at least in WA, OR, and CA, along the Pacific coast, (Smith), ID (collections at Oregon State University), and BC (in Redhead, and collection at the University of British Columbia).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface stains black with application of KOH, flesh stains vinaceous with application of KOH and gray with FeSO4, (Bessette)
CAP  5-15cm, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old; "yellow, especially when young, bright reddish brown to vinaceous brown or cinnamon with a yellow margin at maturity, sometimes with green tinges or green overall when young or mature"; bald, glutinous to viscid, somewhat streaked under gluten; margin often with hanging veil remnants^, (Bessette), 9-25cm, convex to flat or wavy and irregular when old; "at times deep vinaceous brown to testaceous, sometimes cinnamon or toward margin yellow streaked with cinnamon"; bald or with veil remnants only near margin, viscid, "somewhat streaked beneath the pellicle"; margin with hanging veil remnants, (Smith), 'reddish to dark brownish lavender ("vinaceous-brown" to "testaceous") to sometimes brown ("cinnamon") or yellow toward the margin and streaked with cinnamon' (colors in quotation marks from Ridgway), (Thiers(1))
FLESH  "yellow, unchanging or becoming pale vinaceous in spots when exposed"^, (Bessette), thick, firm; yellow, unchanging, very seldom with larval tunnels even when old; in stem pale yellow, greenish in base where cut, "with a faint pink tinge above as well as in pileus finally", (Smith)
PORES  1-3mm, subangular [somewhat angular]; yellow at first, becoming dull yellow when old, staining brownish when bruised; tube layer up to 1.5cm thick, decurrent to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), 1-3mm in longest dimension, subangular; yellow staining brownish; tube layer up to 1.5cm thick (in 25cm cap), decurrent, dull yellow, (Smith), tubes unchanging when exposed (Thiers(1))
STEM  6-14cm x 2.5-6cm, narrowing downward or nearly equal down to tapered base, solid; yellow above annulus, pale yellow to yellow below annulus when young, becoming dull rusty brown below annulus when old or when handled; dry, reticulate above annulus and bald to obscurely reticulate below annulus when young; partial veil "membranous, pale yellow to yellow or orange-yellow with reddish brown tints, coated with gluten; annulus membranous, superior, glutinous and often stained reddish brown on the underside"^, (Bessette), 9-14cm x 3-6cm, narrowing downward, with pointed base at times, solid; bright yellow above annulus and soon sordid rusty in lower part from handling; reticulate above annulus from decurrent tubes, less reticulate below annulus; "annulus membranous, superior, often stained reddish cinnamon on under side from a gelatinous outer layer", (Smith), reticulate above annulus from decurrent tubes, sometimes obscurely reticulate below annulus; annulus is bright orange to orange yellow in young fruitbodies, (Thiers(1))
ODOR  acidic or not distinctive^ (Bessette), sharply acidulous, (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild, (Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups on ground under conifers, especially Douglas-fir^, (Bessette), scattered "in forests of Douglas-fir, hemlock and pine (P. contorta) mixed", (Smith), confined to Douglas-fir (Thiers(11))
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Bessette), snuff brown, (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-12 x 4-5 um, elliptic to subfusoid, smooth, colorless to olive-yellow^, (Bessette), spores 8-10(12) x 3.8-5 um, elliptic to subfusoid or nearly oblong, smooth, pale ochraceous in Melzer's reagent, colorless to olive-yellowish in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 26-31 x 7-10 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia 29-72 x 5-8 um, cylindric to clavate, or crooked, at times subfusoid, colorless or with dark brown pigment as revived in KOH, single or in clusters and with dark yellow-brown pigment in and around base of cluster, cheilocystidia similar to pleurocystidia; cap epicutis a gelatinous layer of interwoven colorless to pale ochraceous hyphae 2-4 um wide and branched not infrequently; caulocystidia 50-70 x 6-12 um, cylindric to clavate or fusoid, scattered and in clusters, colorless to dark brown in KOH and some incrusted in addition, "amorphous dark brown pigment around clusters and distributed in caulohymenium (as revived in KOH)"; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "heavy"^ (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Suillus caerulescens is very similar but the exposed flesh at the stem base stains bluish green, and it has a dry, fibrillose annulus that lacks the glutinous underside (Bessette, but note that description of S. ponderosus in Smith(34) and Thiers(1) also mentions greenish color in stem base when cut). S. caerulescens is similar when older, but when younger S. ponderosus is distinguished by its bright reddish brown bald cap, and its viscid to glutinous annulus that is bright orange to orange yellow when young, (Thiers(1)). See also SIMILAR section of Suillus lakei.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Smith(34), Thiers(1), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Redhead(5), Thiers(11), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, Smith(10)
83
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus pseudobrevipes  A.H. Sm. and Thiers^  Contribution Toward a Monograph of North American Suillus pp.46-47. 1964
ENGLISH NAME(S)  pine slipperycap, veiled short-stemmed slippery-jack
NOTES  Features include 1) a yellow-brown to red-brown, glutinous cap that often has hanging veil remnants and sometimes scattered patches near the cap margin, 2) white to yellow flesh that becomes pinkish around larval tunnels, 3) small, round, ocher-yellow unchanging pores, 4) a white to yellow stem that is often short and has obscure glandular dots and usually a fibrillose annulus.^ RANGE ^Suillus pseudobrevipes is found at least in ID and WY, (Smith). Range includes the Rocky Mountains, the southwestern US, and CA, (Bessette). There are collections at the University of Washington from WA, OR, MT, and WY, and at the University of British Columbia from BC. There is some DNA support for the occurrence of this species in BC (D. Miller, pers. comm.)
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^flesh slowly stains olive with application of FeSO4 (Bessette)
CAP  6-14cm, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old; "honey-yellow to dark yellow-brown or dark reddish brown"; glutinous becoming viscid when old, usually bald but sometimes appearing fibrillose-streaked under gluten; margin with hanging veil remnants, and remaining incurved well into maturity^, (Bessette), 6-14cm, convex to broadly convex, finally nearly flat; honey-yellow to "clay color" (Ridgway color) or a darker yellow brown; glutinous at first, finally merely viscid, "bald or at times with thin white patches of veil material scattered near the margin", at times appearing fibrillose-streaked under gluten; margin frequently with hanging veil remnants, (Smith), "dingy yellowish to yellow-brown, dark yellow-brown, or honey-colored", often becoming darker or more cinnamon when old, (Arora)
FLESH  white to pale yellow and becoming darker when old, unchanging when exposed^, (Bessette), thick; "pale yellow or white at first then becoming yellow", unchanging when bruised but dingy pinkish around larval tunnels; in stem white but pinkish around larval tunnels and often brownish in base, (Smith)
PORES  2-3 per mm, round; ocher-yellow, unchanging when bruised; tube layer 0.6-1cm thick, slightly depressed to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), +/-3 per mm, round; ocher yellowish, not staining when bruised; tube layer 0.6-1cm thick (in 14cm caps), slightly depressed around stem to short decurrent, pale dingy yellow becoming dull ocher yellow by maturity, (Smith)
STEM  2-8cm x 1-3cm, nearly equal or narrowing downward, solid; white at first, becoming yellowish when old; dry, glandular dots whitish, obscure when young; partial veil typically sheathing lower half of stem, "usually forming a median annulus or annular zone"^, (Bessette), 2-8cm x 1-3cm, equal or narrowing downward, solid; white at first, yellowish when old; bald at first, reticulate in upper part when old from decurrent tubes, glandular dots present as whitish spots when young, not darker when old or only slightly so (in another part of description refers to "the almost complete absence of glandular dots on the stipe"); "veil leaving a median annulus or more rarely a fibrillose zone, typically sheathing lower half of stipe with floccose to submembranous avellaneous material which is soft and finally collapses to form a single ring", (Smith), dots absent or obscure when young but tending to become brown or more visible when old; veil "white to dingy lavender or lavender-brown", usually forming a median fibrillose annulus on stem, but annulus often slight or collapsed, (Arora)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette, Smith)
TASTE  slightly acidic or not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild to slightly acidulous, (Smith)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette), edible (Arora)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups on ground under pine^, (Bessette), gregarious to scattered under Lodgepole Pine (Pinus contorta), (Smith), scattered to gregarious under pines, mainly Lodgepole and Ponderosa Pine, (Arora)
SPORE DEPOSIT  cinnamon-buff^ (Bessette), near "cinnamon buff" (Ridgway color), (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 2.5-3 um, oblong, smooth, pale ochraceous^, (Bessette), spores 7-9 x 2.5-3 um, oblong, smooth, pale ochraceous in KOH, slightly darker in Melzer's reagent, wall slightly thickened but less than 0.5 um; basidia 4-spored, 14-18 x 5.5-7 um, short-clavate, colorless in KOH; pleurocystidia projecting slightly from hymenium, 20-30 x 9-10 um, short-clavate, "in fascicles and these surrounded by copious rusty brown amorphous pigment", "individual cystidia with ochraceous to rusty brown content as revived in KOH", cheilocystidia 20-30 x 5-7 um, subcylindric to subfusoid, content ochraceous to rusty brown; cap epicutis a gelatinous trichodermium of hyphae (3)4-12 um wide, "mostly unbranched, becoming decumbent on cap surface", greenish-transparent in KOH and with scattered colorless granules in the interior; caulocystidia resembling cheilocystidia in size, shape and color, "rare, a few in a fascicle and fascicles rare to scattered, visible in the caulohymenium because of the brown amorphous pigment deposits"; clamp connections absent, (Smith), spores 7-9 x 2.5-4 um, spindle-shaped to elliptic, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'false [Suillus] brevipes'
SIMILAR  Suillus brevipes lacks a partial veil and annulus (Bessette). S. brevipes is similar in having a short stem but lacks a partial veil and has a darker cap, (Arora). S. brevipes is less distinctly streaked, (McKnight). Suillus brunnescens has a partial veil but not an annulus, and it has a white cap when young that becomes yellow-brown to lilac-brown when mature and stains vinaceous, then brownish when bruised, (Bessette). Suillus luteus has conspicuous glandular dots, and has narrower hyphae in the gelatinous cap trichoderm, (Smith). Sometimes the veil of S. pseudobrevipes persists as a roll of cottony tissue on the cap margin and does not form a distinct annulus, leading to confusion with such species as Suillus brunnescens and S. glandulosipes, (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Suillus albivelatus.
SOURCES  Bessette(3)*, Smith(34), Arora(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Siegel(2)*
84
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus punctatipes  (Snell and E.A. Dick) Snell & E.A. Dick^  Mycologia 53: 235. 1961
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a viscid to glutinous, often streaked cap that is brown to dark brown when young, often becoming purplish brown or cinnamon to orange-cinnamon when old, 2) white flesh, 3) large, cream to ocher-yellow pores that are elongated and radially arranged, and 4) a white to yellow stem that has brownish vinaceous to dark brown dots and smears and often stains brownish but has no partial veil or annulus.^ RANGE ^Suillus punctatipes is found in WA (Smith(34)), ID (Smith(36)), from MI to Pacific Northwest and CA (Bessette), OR (collections at Oregon State University), and BC (collections at the University of British Columbia).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  4-15cm, hemispheric to convex becoming broadly convex when old; brown to dark brown when young, often becoming purplish brown or cinnamon to orange-cinnamon when old; bald, viscid to glutinous, often streaked; margin even or sometimes with narrow band of sterile tissue^, (Bessette), up to 10cm broad, hemispheric at first, becoming broadly convex; pinkish brown when moist, drying avellaneous at least in spots; very viscid when wet, bald except margin which is appressed-tomentose, pellicle separable, (Smith(34)), 8-16(20)cm, convex or irregular from mutual pressure, broadly convex when old or margin spreading and wavy; pinkish cinnamon to vinaceous orange-brown, or when old grayish to violaceous brown; bald and glutinous but at times virgate [streaked] below slime; margin bald when young, (Smith(35))
FLESH  white to yellowish, usually greenish yellow near tubes and tinged grayish vinaceous under cap surface, not staining when exposed^, (Bessette), 2-5cm in center, firm, compact; white, tinged grayish vinaceous under cap surface and greenish yellow next to tubes, unchanging; in stem hard and compact, white with base dull vinaceous, unchanging, (Smith(34)), thick; white except yellow near tubes and vinaceous under cap surface; in stem white at first, "staining vinaceous to vinaceous-brown where injured, at times entirely vinaceous-brown", (Smith(35))
PORES  1-3mm long, radially arranged and elongated; whitish to tan at first, becoming yellow to ochraceous when mature, unchanging or staining brownish when bruised; tube layer 0.6-1cm thick, subdecurrent at first, becoming depressed when old^, (Bessette), medium to large, irregular, generally oval, elongated radially, arranged radially, glandular dotted; tube layer 0.5-0.6cm thick, arcuate, short-decurrent, radiately arranged and more or less separated by veins, warm buff, becoming yellow ocher, unchanging, (Smith(34)), 1-3(4)mm radially when old, boletinoid [elongated and radial in arrangement] from the first, cream when young, ocher-yellow when mature, often grayish when old, staining neither brown nor blue when injured; tube layer up to 1cm thick when mature, mostly 0.4-0.7cm thick, decurrent, pale yellow becoming ocher-yellow, not staining, (Smith(35))
STEM  3-8cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal or widening downward, "sometimes abruptly constricted at the base", solid; white, with yellow near top or base, sometimes yellow nearly overall, frequently stained brownish; dry, "with brownish vinaceous to dark brown glandular dots and smears, at least on the upper half; partial veil and annulus absent"^, (Bessette), 5-7cm x 1-3cm, equal or widening downward; white when young, remaining white in upper part or becoming straw-yellow, pinkish brown in lower part; very obscurely reticulated at the top, "with a subviscid pellicle which becomes minutely areolate on drying, glandular-dotted on the upper half or so", dots brownish vinaceous; bald on lower part, (Smith(34)), 6-10cm x 1-3cm, solid, usually narrowed at base; white at first becoming yellow where not stained vinaceous-brown; "glandular dotted or with masses of glandular cutis about 1cm wide present, glandulae pinkish to vinaceous-brown", (Smith(35))
ODOR  pungent or not distinctive^ (Bessette), none (Smith(34), Smith(35))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), none (Smith(34), Smith(35))
EDIBILITY  edible once gluten is removed (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups on ground in conifer forests^, (Bessette), type collected under Douglas-fir, hemlock and fir, (Smith(34)), single in mixed conifers (Smith for single collection in Michigan)
SPORE DEPOSIT  ochraceous brown^ (Bessette), bright ochraceous brown (Smith(34))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 3-4 um, subelliptic to oblong, smooth, nearly colorless^, (Bessette), spores 7-10 x 3-3.5 um, mostly 8 x 3 um, elliptic, colorless, a few deep olivaceous; cystidia 40-80 x 6-9 um, cylindric to somewhat clavate, densely clustered, colorless to dark-colored, (Smith(34)), spores 7.5-9 x 3-3.2 um, oblong, smooth, inamyloid, colorless to slightly yellowish or some dark red-brown in KOH; basidia 4-spored; pleurocystidia 45-68 x 6-9 um, cylindric to narrowly clavate, clustered, "much vinaceous-red to vinaceous-brown amorphous pigment around the clusters in the hymenium" but many cystidia with colorless content at least in the projecting part; cap cuticle a collapsed trichodermium of hyphae 4-10 um wide and as revived in KOH with copious incrustation of fine granules, the layer gelatinous; caulocystidia similar to pleurocystidia or smaller; clamp connections absent, (Smith(35))
NAME ORIGIN  means "punctate-stemmed"^, (Both(1))
SIMILAR  Suillus granulatus has a pinkish cinnamon cap that lacks the darker brown tones and irregular to round pores that are not boletinoid (i.e. not radially arranged and elongated), (Bessette).
SOURCES  Smith(35), Bessette(3)*, Smith(34), Smith(36), Trudell(4)*, Snell(2), Both(1)
85
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus quiescens  T.D. Bruns & E.C. Vellinga^  Mycologia 102(2): 442. 2010
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a glutinous cap that is light brown becoming darker, 2) a cap margin that is inrolled with a narrow sterile zone, 3) white flesh that is unchanging or slightly changing, 4) radially elongate yellow pores less than 1 mm wide, 5) a short stem that is yellow at the top and white to yellow lower down, the stem decorated with fine glandular dots, 6) fruiting in small groups with pines between November and March, and 7) microscopic characters including both 2-spored and 4-spored basidia in most collections.^ | The description is derived from Bruns(1). Colors in single quotation marks are from Kelly(4). RANGE ^Suillus quiescens was described from CA (Santa Cruz Island in Santa Barbara County, also found at Point Reyes National Seashore north of San Francisco). Fruitbodies have not yet been identified in Oregon or Washington, but molecular sequences closely match those recovered from mycorrhizae of pine seedlings in Oregon. There is a photograph of S. quiescens from WA by N. Siegel on iNaturalist (observation 99945706, not sequenced).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  6-12cm across, "broad, hemispheric to broadly convex"; approaching 'strong brown' or 'deep brown' when mature, "sometimes with olivaceous patches or tones", much paler when young but still some shade of 'light brown', or between 'light brown' and 'light orange', or grayish yellow; covered with a glutinous layer, the gluten "often drying in strands to give a slightly fibrillose look to older specimens"; margin inrolled when young "with a limited sterile zone of a millimeter or less"
FLESH  white, generally unchanging, sometimes with brownish stains just under the cap surface, and pale yellow just above tubes; in stem "white and unchanging, but sometimes with orangish stains in older or insect-damaged parts"
PORES  mature pores radially elongate but generally less than 1 mm wide; tubes when young near 'pale yellow' and "with light brown or yellowish brown glandular secretions", older tubes slightly lighter than 'brilliant orange yellow', becoming near 'olivaceous yellow'
STEM  typically 2-4cm long but sometimes longer (6-8cm), equal or slightly bulbous, or tapered to base; 'pale yellow' to 'light yellow' on the top fifth, the lower part the same color as top or white or overlaid with a 'light brown' layer or streaks of gluten as on the cap, occasionally this overlay giving the impression of an annular zone; surface finely glandular, glands at first only slightly darker than surface but sometimes light brown, becoming nearly black after drying
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  fruiting in small groups with pines, November to March^, (Bruns), fall, winter, spring
SPORE DEPOSIT  not determined but probably between 'strong yellow brown' and 'strong brown' as seen on cap surface
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.1-14.7 x 2.4-3.7 um in side view, "elongate, with a slight suprahilar depression in side view, and oblong in face view", most with a single large droplet, with inconspicuous hilar appendage^; basidia 2-4-spored, 20.2-26.2 x 5.2-6.7 um, clavate, without clamp connection, sterigmata very thick when young, 2-spored and 4-spored basidia present in most collections; pleurocystidia "similar to cheilocystidia, but size and frequency of clusters decreases distal to the tube mouth", cheilocystidia similar to those in many other granulatus-like Suillus species: 21-30 x 3.1-6.2 um, either in dense clusters (14-125 um wide) embedded in brown incrusting material, or single, primarily narrowly clavate, or cylindric and then often septate, "with yellow-brown inclusions that appear to be shrunken away from the wall, thin-walled", single cystidia colorless, "without incrustations, sometimes with mucronate or capitate apices"; no clear clamp connections seen
NAME ORIGIN  "refers to the species' ability to lay quiescent in the spore bank until it encounters pine roots", (Bruns)
SIMILAR  Fruitbodies are similar to Suillus brevipes but the cap of S. quiescens is paler, the stem apex is yellowish, and with maturity there are fine glandular dots at the top of the stem, (Bruns). Suillus glandulosipes also has an inrolled margin when young, but in contrast to that species Suillus quiescens has only a small sterile zone that one might need a hand lens to see, (Bruns). Suillus pungens of California has more prominent glandular dots on stem, has a white cap when immature, and has strong olivaceous tones before becoming similar in color to older S. quiescens, (Bruns).
SOURCES  Bruns(1), Kelly(4), Nguyen(3)
86
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus subalpinus  M.M. Moser^  Mycotaxon 65: 397. 1997
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a patchy whitish, gray-brown, reddish brown, or vinaceous brown cap that develops orange-brown tones when old, 2) white flesh that is faintly yellowish when old, 3) small pores in a whitish pore surface that matures yellow, 4) a short, white stem that is covered with white to reddish then brownish glandular dots, 5) absent partial veil, 6) growth in subalpine habitat under Whitebark Pine, and 7) microscopic characters.^ |"Although originally reported to occur with Whitebark and Limber Pine (Pinus flexilis) in Wyoming, it appears that S. subalpinus is an obligate ectomycorrhizal symbiont of Whitebark Pine." (Siegel(3) (with Latin name italicized)). |The description is derived from Siegel(3) except where noted.| The Suillus flavogranulatus description (as opposed to the holotype whose sequence matched Suillus lakei) is very much like Suillus subalpinus, and the relationship between the two should be investigated. It should also be investigated whether some reports of Suillus granulatus are really Suillus subalpinus. (D. Miller, pers. comm.) RANGE ^Suillus alpinus was described from WY and also has been sequenced from WA, OR, MT and CA, (D. Miller, pers. comm.). C. Cripps reported it from Montana and British Columbia, (Siegel(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  3-7.5cm across, "convex with an incurved margin", becoming broadly convex to flat, "occasionally depressed at disc"; color variable, "whitish near margin, gray-brown, reddish brown to vinaceous brown towards disc, often variegated in a blotchy or spotty pattern, less often unicolor", becoming more orange-brown to warm brown when old; smooth, "glutinous when young", viscid to tacky when old; margin "lacking sterile tissue when young"^, (Siegel), disc when old flat or even slightly depressed, (Moser)
FLESH  moderately thick, firm when young, soft when old; white to faintly yellowish when old^, (Siegel), "white, in young specimens in base sometimes slightly bluish but not really changing color", when old "very faintly yellowish", (Moser)
PORES  pores "small, occasionally radially arranged", white, whitish to ivory when young, "developing creamy tones, and maturing yellow"; tubes 0.3-0.5cm long^, (Siegel), pores at first very fine, when old wider, 2-3 per mm, pores and tubes "at first white, whitish to ivory, later slowly turning more or less yellow", tubes rather short, 0.3-0.5cm long, (Moser)
STEM  2-5.5cm x 1-2.5cm at top, equal, or widening or narrowing downward, "extreme base pointed"; white when young "covered with white to reddish, then brownish glandular dots"; base color developing yellowish tones when old; partial veil absent^, (Siegel), 2-5.5cm x 1.0-2.5cm at top, base occasionally up to 4.0cm wide, "equal or base tapering or enlarged but the very base pointed"; "white, over the whole length with well developed at first white, later reddish glandular dots which turn brownish to porphyraceous" when old, apex when old slightly yellowish; no trace of veil, (Moser)
ODOR  indistinct
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or scattered in soil under Pinus albicaulis (Whitebark Pine), "summer or fall in high-elevation subalpine forest"^, (Siegel), growing under five-needle pines - Pinus albicaulis (Whitebark Pine), Pinus flexilis (Limber Pine), "in subalpine forests up to timber line", (Moser)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "olive to brownish olive"
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-7.7(9.2) x 2.5-3(3.8) um, "slender cylindric to subfusoid, smooth, thin-walled"^; basidia 4-spored, 23-32 x 6.5-8 um, clavate; hymenial cystidia 40-50(80) x 6-12 um (base 2-3 um wide), "clavate or occasionally slightly capitate, solitary or clustered", colorless or with brown contents, "walls incrusted"; cheilocystidia 20-90 x 5-9 um. "clavate, often in large clusters"; cap cuticle an ixocutis, hyphae 2-2.5 um wide, colorless, hyphae in lower layer up to 7 um wide, pale brown, (Siegel), spores 6.5-7.7(9.2) x 2.5-2.9(3.8) um, smooth, "pale olivaceous under microscope", thin-walled; basidia 4-spored 23-32 x 6.5-8 um, clavate; hymenial cystidia 40-50(80) x 6-12 um, "clavate, sometimes slightly capitate", "single or in large fascicles or cushions, colorless or with brown contents, walls encrusted and often pigment accumulations around the base"; cheilocystidia 20-90 x 5-9 um, clavate, "with brown contents, often in large clusters"; cap cuticle an ixocutis, hyphae on surface 2-2.5 um, "colorless, granulose encrusted, irregular to subrepent", in deeper layer up to 7 um wide "and walls pale brown, encrusted and more regularly arranged", (Moser)
NAME ORIGIN  named after subalpine habitat
SIMILAR  Suillus brunnescens is similar but has a veil (Moser). Suillus albidipes "can also have white to vinaceous brown colors, has similar spores and may also occur with 5-needle pines", but the glandular dots of the stem are lacking in young stages and only slightly developed when old in lower parts. Suillus pallidiceps "changes color from white to yellowish or cinnamon buff", has no glandular stem, and "grows with 2-needle pines", (Moser)
SOURCES  Siegel(3)*, Moser(12)
87
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus suilloides  (Thiers) Kretzer & T.D. Bruns^  Mycologia 89(4): 589. 1997;  Gastrosuillus suilloides  (Thiers) Thiers  Mem. N. Y. bot. Gdn 49: 358. 1989;  Gastroboletus suilloides  Thiers  Brittonia 21: 248. 1969
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Also listed in the Truffles category. Features of Suillus suilloides include 1) a hypogeous to partly emergent fruitbody that is convex to nearly round, the surface yellowish brown to cinnamon brown or pinkish brown, dry, and bald becoming fibrillose-scaly or tomentose, 2) unchanging buff to cream context, 3) a spore mass with distorted greenish-yellow tubes, and small irregular pores of the same color, 4) an poorly developed stem-columella colored like the cap, 5) mild odor and taste, 6) growth under conifers at higher elevations, and 7) microscopic characters including fascicled darkly staining cystidia and spore shape that both suggest Suillus.^ | The current name in the online Species Fungorum, accessed April 20, 2020, was Suillus suilloides, with Gastrosuillus suilloides and Gastroboletus suilloides as synonyms. MycoBank, accessed the same day gave all three names as obligate or homotypic synonyms, without specifying a current name. The description is derived from Thiers(7). RANGE ^Suillus suilloides was described from CA but according to Noah Siegel (pers. comm.) has been recorded also from OR.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  2.5-5cm across when mature, "convex to subglobose to plano-convex during all stages of development"; peridium ' "ochraceous buff" to "cinnamon brown" to "buckthorn brown" to occasionally as dark as "mikado brown" to "sayal brown" ' when older, "unchanging when bruised"; dry, bald when young, "often becoming fibrillose to tomentose to appressed fibrillose scaly with age, sometimes becoming areolate with age"
FLESH  0.3-0.7cm thick, "ochraceous buff" to pale "cream color", "unchanging when exposed"
PORES  pores "small, irregular", greenish yellow to olive-yellow; gleba distinctly "tubulose", tubes typically exposed at maturity (but "arranged so as to make a spore deposit impossible"); colored like the pore surface, "unchanging when bruised or exposed"
STEM  stem-columella typically poorly developed, 0.5-1.0cm x 0.3-0.5cm, more or less colored as the cap during all stages of development; dry, tomentose to appressed-fibrillose
ODOR  not distinctive
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single to gregarious, "hypogeous to partially emergent", under conifers including Abies magnifica (California Red Fir) and Pinus contorta ssp. murrayana (Sierra Lodgepole Pine) in higher elevations of the Sierra Nevada of California, late summer
SPORE DEPOSIT  none
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.4-12 x 3.5-4.5 um, elliptic to inequilateral, some appearing oval or "occasionally more or less constricted at the midportion", "smooth, walls slightly thickened, sterigmal appendages oblique"^; basidia 4-spored, 20-37 x 6-8 um, "narrowly clavate to subcylindric, clavate to depressed at the center", colorless in KOH; brachybasidioles 15-23 x 4-8 um, clavate; cystidia "abundant to numerous", 35-55 x 5-11 um, "clavate to cylindric to subcylindric", "typically clustered and staining dark brown in KOH and Melzer's" as in Suillus; clamp connections absent
NAME ORIGIN  means 'like Suillus'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Thiers(7) (colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)) (as Gastroboletus)
88
FAMILY  Suillaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Suillus tomentosus  Singer, Snell, and E.A. Dick^  Mycologia 51: 570. 1960
ENGLISH NAME(S)  tomentose Suillus, woolly pine bolete, woollycap, blue-staining slippery-jack, poor man's slippery-jack, woolly-capped Suillus, bluing slippery-jack
NOTES  Features of Suillus tomentosus include 1) a dry to viscid cap that has grayish brown to ocher, olive-yellow or reddish brown fibrils or scales on yellow to orange yellow background, 2) pallid to yellow flesh that turns blue, 3) brown then yellow pores that turn blue when bruised, 4) stem the same color as the cap or more orange, with glandular dots on stem that are usually browner, and no partial veil or annulus, and 5) growth under conifers, particularly 2-needle pines. The fruiting body tends to stain the fingers brown.^ | S. tomentosus is very common in the Pacific Northwest. RANGE ^It is found in WA, OR, ID, CA, CO, MI, WY, (Smith(34)), NB, NS, PQ, and NC, (Both). It is widely distributed from eastern Canada south to NC and SC, west to the Pacific Northwest, south to CA, (Bessette). It has been reported from BC (Bandoni), and MT (L. Evans, pers. comm.). Var. discolor occurs in ID.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap surface stains pale gray with application of FeSO4, (Bessette), flesh pale gray with FeSO4, (Thiers)
CAP  5-12cm, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly convex to flat when old and margin uplifted and wavy; yellow to orange-yellow ground color, fibrils and scales grayish, yellow-ocher, dark olive-yellow, or reddish brown; conspicuously fibrillose-scaly when young, becoming nearly bald when old; margin coarsely tomentose at first^, (Bessette), 5-10(15)cm, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly convex; ground color pale yellow to pale orange-yellow, with tomentum and scales that vary 'from pallid (young buttons) to pale buff, pinkish buff, grayish (when wet), orange-cinnamon to tawny, russet, or "Bordeaux red" (dark red)' (Ridgway colors); viscid beneath tomentum and scales, at first tomentose-floccose to squamulose but gradually becoming bald; margin rather coarsely tomentose at first but gradually becoming bald, (Smith), 5-15(20)cm, "background usually pale yellow to yellow-orange, orange-buff, or dark dull orange", "fibrils or scales usually grayish brown to brown (reddish in one form), sometimes pallid or buff when young"; dry, but in wet weather or when old often viscid, at first covered with a dense coating of fibrils that break up to form scattered scales and are often sparse or even absent when old, (Arora), velvety to soft-scaly; margin extends beyond tubes (McKnight), "typically has a covering of grayish, yellowish, reddish brown, or bright red fibrils or fibrillose scales over an orange-yellow to yellowish background", (Trudell)
FLESH  "yellow, staining blue irregularly and often slowly when exposed"^, (Bessette), 0.8-1.5cm; pallid to yellow but paler than cap surface, "changing slowly to blue or greenish blue when cut or bruised"; in stem yellow but paler than cap surface, staining greenish blue slightly when cut, (Smith)
PORES  up to 1mm, angular; "brown to vinaceous brown or dingy cinnamon", becoming dingy yellow to olive-yellow when old, turning blue when bruised; "sometimes beaded with yellowish droplets at first"; tube layer 0.8-1.5cm thick, adnate to subdecurrent^, (Bessette), about 2 per mm, bister to dark dingy cinnamon or vinaceous brown when young, slowly becoming dingy yellow, staining bluish when injured at least when old; tube layer 1-2cm thick, adnate to decurrent, rarely depressed around stem, "pale dingy yellow becoming dingy olive-yellow and staining dingy greenish blue when injured", (Smith), usually turning blue at least slightly when bruised, at least when old, (Arora)
STEM  5-12cm x 1-2.5cm, widening downward or nearly equal, solid; yellow to dull orange-yellow; with darker orange to brownish glandular dots, dry to moist; partial veil and annulus absent^, (Bessette), (3)5-10(12)cm x 1-2(3)cm at top, equal or clavate, solid; colored as cap or more orange, when tomentum is reddish on cap, the base of the stem may be reddish also; "glandular-dotted to glandular-punctate over all"; no veil remnants; mycelium around base cream to cream-buff at first, soon becoming vinaceous-buff or redder, (Smith), 3-11(15)cm x 1-3cm, dots may be the same color as stem or browner and are often obvious when old; base sometimes reddish-stained, (Arora)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), none (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), slightly acid to mild (Smith)
EDIBILITY  edible (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups under conifers^, (Bessette), scattered to gregarious under 2-needle pines, (Smith), summer and fall (Miller), primarily under Lodgepole and Shore Pines (Trudell)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown ^ (Bessette), dark olive brown, very slowly changing to dull cinnamon, (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-12 x 3-5 um, fusoid to elongate-oval, smooth, yellowish^, (Bessette), spores 7-10(12) x 3-4(5) um, obscurely fusoid to elongate-ovoid, smooth, inamyloid, pale yellowish in KOH; basidia 4-spored, 26-34 x 5-8 um, clavate, yellowish in KOH; pleurocystidia "30-46 X 7-10 um, subcylindric to narrowly clavate or narrowed to a blunt apex, often with incrusting debris", content colorless to dingy yellow-brown, "typically in bunches and at level of hymenium the cluster surrounded by brown incrusting material, as revived in KOH", when fresh colorless to pale vinaceous brown in KOH, cheilocystidia "similar to pleurocystidia, very numerous and tube dissepiments often with copious brown amorphous pigment"; cap epicutis "a layer of gelatinous interwoven hyphae in the form of an interrupted trichodermium the elements of which become fused to form the squamules", these hyphae 8-12 um wide, with end-cells somewhat cystidioid and 10-16 um at widest part; caulocystidia abundant, similar to cheilocystidia; clamp connections absent, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "covered with hair"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Suillus fuscotomentosus does not stain blue, its cap color is darker, and its spores are larger, (Smith). |Suillus discolor (=Suillus tomentosus var. discolor) grows on the ground under white pine and has a dense appressed layer of grayish fibrils on the cap when young, a bald, glutinous to viscid, brownish to olive-brown cap that becomes dull cinnamon brown at maturity, dingy ochraceous flesh "that typically stains blue when exposed and slowly stains green with the application of FeSO4", "dingy ochraceous pore surface that slowly and slightly stains greenish blue, then brownish when bruised", stem "with coarse, ochraceous to orange-brown glandular dots that soon become dark brown to grayish brown from handling", yellow-brown spore deposit, and spores 9-13 x 4-4.5 um, (Bessette). Both(1) says var. discolor differs in its association with white pine, different color of cap, pores less brown, and different color of spore deposit. 
SOURCES  Smith(34), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Thiers(1), Lincoff(2)*, Miller(14)*, Ammirati(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Sept(1)*, Bandoni(1), Both(1), AroraPocket(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, McAdoo(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
89
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomellus amylosporus  (A.H. Sm.) J.L. Frank & N. Siegel^  Fungal Systematics and Evolution 6: 267. 2020;  == Boletus amylosporus  (A.H. Sm.) Wolfe  Nova Hedwigia 43: 518. 1986;  == Porphyrellus amylosporus  A.H. Sm.  Mycopath. et Mycol. Appl. 26: 397. 1965;  == Tylopilus amylosporus  (A.H. Sm.) A.H. Sm.;  = Gastroboletus xerocomoides  Trappe & Thiers  Brittonia 21: 247. 1969
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry, velvety cap that is dark olive-brown to grayish brown or vinaceous brown with whitish to yellow or pinkish flesh showing in the cracks, 2) flesh that may turn blue erratically and shows red in stem and around larval tunnels, 3) yellow pores that sometimes have reddish tints and that turn blue when bruised, 4) stem that is reddish or with red striations over a yellow base, some becoming brownish, olive-gray, reddish, or reddish brown, often with a red band at the top, 5) growth under conifers, alder or oak, and 6) microscopic characters that include weakly to distinctly amyloid spores, most with a truncate apex.^ |Siegel(2) say (in the California context), "There are three species that have been lumped under the incorrectly applied name X. chrysenteron, with X. diffractus being the most common and widespread of the bunch. X. amylosporus typically has a darker cap with more scattered and irregular cracks, the pores bruise dark inky blue, the stipe develops dingy brownish tones, and the spores are more reddish brown in color." X. salicicola is similar but much rarer, and "can be told apart by its more-often cracked cap and growth with willow", (Siegel(2) with Latin names italicized). |X. amylosporus is uncommon, but rather widespread, (Frank(9)). |Collections in dry habitats tend to form gastroid fruiting bodies, "and many Sierra Nevada collections are deformed", (Frank(9)). |The ITS sequence of the type of Gastroboletus xerocomoides is identical to that of the type of Xerocomellus amylosporus. Note that while about half of the spores of Gastroboletus xerocomoides were truncate as in X. amylosporus, the spores were described as inamyloid and wider, measuring 12.8-18(21) x 6.4-8 um. RANGE ^The known distribution is Pacific Northwest, north to at least Vancouver Island BC, south into CA, east to the Northern Rocky Mountains; collections were examined from WA, OR, ID (including holotype), and CA (including type of Gastroboletus xerocomoides), (Frank(9)). Xerocomellus amylosporus is found in ID (Smith), the northern Rocky Mountains and CA (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap flesh no reaction to KOH or FeSO4 (Smith)
CAP  4-10cm across, bun-shaped becoming convex to flat; "dark olive brown to grayish brown, to vinaceous brown", "in cracks dull whitish to yellow, becoming pinkish in age"; "dry, finely velvety to matted-tomentose, lacking cracks when young, becoming areolate around the margin, to extensively areolate in age", (Frank(9)), 4-12cm, convex becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when old; dark olive-brown to grayish brown, yellow to dull whitish flesh showing in cracks; dry, velvety-subtomentose, become cracked and scurfy when old, (Bessette), 4-12cm, convex becoming broadly convex; dark olive-fuscous becoming olive-brown to olive-buff; dry, velvety, when old areolate [cracked like dried mud] or merely cracked, (Smith)
FLESH  in cap "firm to soft, light yellow, erratically bruising blue", (Frank(9)), yellow to dull whitish, turning blue erratically or sometimes not changing when exposed, (Bessette), pale yellow except red just under cap surface, staining blue when cut and slowly becoming red around larval tunnels; in stem red, (Smith)
PORES  1-2 per mm, "slightly angular or irregular", "yellow to golden yellow at first, becoming olive yellow, bruising inky blue to dark blue somewhat quickly"; tube layer slightly sunken around stem, (Frank(9)), 1-2 per mm, angular; "yellow, becoming golden yellow to dull yellow or olive-yellow", sometimes with reddish tints, turning blue when bruised; tube layer 0.8-2cm thick, depressed near stem when old, (Bessette), large and irregular in outline when mature, greenish yellow, readily staining blue; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, ventricose, dull yellow to greenish yellow, turning blue where cut, (Smith), pores bruise dark inky blue (Siegel)
STEM  4-10cm x 1-2cm, cylindric to club-shaped, "reddish or with red longitudinal striations over a yellowish base when young, soon becoming brownish to reddish brown over much of the stipe to extensively brown with a red band at apex", (Frank(9)), 4.5-10cm x 1-2cm, nearly equal, solid; "with a pale tan to olive-buff or whitish ground color that is typically punctate with reddish dots and points"; dry, not reticulate; yellow basal mycelium, (Bessette), 4-9cm x 1-1.5(2)cm, equal; reddish in a few places but usually entirely olive gray to the pallid apex; faintly pruinose and longitudinally striate at apex, (Smith), develops dingy brown tones (Siegel)
ODOR  indistinct, (Frank(9)), none (Smith)
TASTE  mild, (Frank(9)), mild (Smith)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  single or scattered in troops under conifers, especially Picea sitchensis (Sitka Spruce); type collection was under Alnus rubra (Red Alder) but Alnus has not been present at all sites, (Frank(9)), single or scattered on ground under hardwoods or in mixed woods, frequently associated with oak or red alder, (Bessette), type gregarious under Alnus rubra in Idaho, (Smith)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "olive brown to dark reddish olive" (Frank(9)), dark reddish brown (Bessette), dark "wood brown" on white paper, (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (11.4)13-16.2(18.1) x 5.2-6.5(7.1) um, "fusoid to subcylindrical, inequilateral, most with truncate apex, smooth, weakly to distinctly amyloid", amyloid reaction of the spores "may fade over time or may be weak in some collections"^; basidia (2)4-spored, 27.3-35.7 x 9.9-12.9 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia 28.9-73.5 x 2.9-8.1 um, "narrowly ventricose with elongated apices"; cap cuticle "a trichoderm made up of elongated cells" 8-10 um wide, "with brown incrustations and pigment"; terminal cells conic; clamp connections absent, (Frank(9)), spores 13-18 x 4-7 um, fusoid to subcylindric [spindle-shaped to somewhat cylindric], truncate, smooth, weakly to distinctly amyloid, ochraceous, (Bessette), spores 12-17 x 4.4-6 um, "boletoid" in shape, smooth, "with a circular apical thickening depressed in the center and from here a discontinuity in the wall extends to the interior" (as in Boletus truncatus), on spores crushed out from the dried fruiting body weakly but distinctly amyloid (dull violaceous) and more violaceous in pore region than elsewhere, "spores from a deposit on clean white paper dextrinoid in outer half or one third (apical regions) and merely yellowish toward the apiculus"; basidia 4-spored, 32-38 x 8-10 um, clavate, inamyloid; pleurocystidia scattered, 40-60 x 8-12 um, narrowly fusoid to slightly ventricose to a subacute apex, not incrusted, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle a trichodermium of hyphae 8-15 um wide, with plate-like incrustations of pale bister (in KOH) pigment along the walls, end-cell somewhat cystidioid; clamp connections rare, seen at base of occasional basidium in some fruitbodies, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with amyloid spores'
SIMILAR  Xerocomellus diffractus has reddish flesh showing in cracks, olive-brown spore deposit, and spores that are inamyloid and not truncate, (Bessette). X. diffractus does not stain blue as quickly (N. Siegel, pers. comm.). Note that although the original description does not note pink color in the cracks, there actually can be pink in the cracks (D. Miller, pers. comm.)
SOURCES  Frank(9)*, Bessette(3) (as Tylopilus amylosporus), Smith(31) (as Porphyrellus amylosporus), Siegel(2), Thiers(7) (description of Gastroboletus xerocomoides)
90
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomellus atropurpureus  J.L. Frank, N. Siegel & C.F. Schwarz^  Fungal Systematics and Evolution 6: 276. 2020
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a cap that is dark blackish purple to dark wine red or olivaceous black, and lacks a prominent paler margin, 2) a cap surface that is usually bare or with a slight bloom, often bumpy-wrinkled, 3) yellow flesh that is unchanging or turns blue slightly when older, 4) a dull yellow to greenish yellow pore surface that can be blushed reddish, only rarely bruising blue, the pores moderately small, round to slightly angular, 5) a stem with a yellowish background that is red-punctate or extensively red, often with slightly darker streaks, and 6) growth under conifers and under hardwoods.^ |Gastroid morphological variation occurs in high elevation arid habitats in the southern Cascade Range and the Sierra Nevada (Frank(9)). The description is derived from Siegel(2). RANGE ^Xerocomellus atropurpureus ranges from BC south at least to Monterey County, CA. Collections were examined from WA, OR (including holotype), and CA, (Frank(9)). X. atropurpureus is more common in CA than Xerocomus zelleri (Siegel).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  4-10(12)cm across, "rounded, bun shaped to broadly convex at first, becoming flat occasionally slightly wavy in age"; dark blackish purple, "blackish, deep reddish purple to dark wine red", more rarely "with extensive olivaceous-black tones"; "dry to moist, usually bare or with a faint pale bloom, but not truly velvety, often extensively bumpy-wrinkled, occasionally smoother"^, (Siegel), (3)5-10(14)cm across, "rounded, bun-shaped to broadly convex at first", becoming flat, occasionally slightly wavy when old; "dark blackish purple, deep reddish purple to dark wine-red or reddish brown, sometimes paler red, rarely with extensive olivaceous tones", "dry to moist", usually bald "or with a faint pale bloom, sometimes finely pruinose, rugulose to extensively bumpy-wrinkled, occasionally smoother", irregular cracking can occur when old or under dry conditions, (Frank)
FLESH  firm, fleshy; "marbled yellow, unchanging or bluing slightly in older specimens"^, (Siegel), in cap firm, "pale yellow to creamy white, typically not staining, sometimes erratically staining bluish"; in stem "fibrous, light yellow to creamy whitish, occasionally bluing, more often in base", (Frank)
PORES  moderately small, "round to slightly angular"; pale dull yellow to dingy greenish yellow when old, "occasionally reddish blushed, or rarely extensively red", rarely bruising blue, "and only in older and/or waterlogged specimens"; tubes 0.5-1.5cm long, sunken around stem^, (Siegel), 2-4 per mm, circular when young to slightly angular and wider when mature, pale dull yellow to dingy greenish-yellow when old, "occasionally bruising blue, occasionally reddish-blushed, or rarely extensively reddish"; tube layer pale yellow to yellow, tubes usually colored as pores, (Frank)
STEM  4-9cm x 0.8-3.0cm, "equal or club shaped with an enlarged base"; "densely covered with fine red punctations with a yellowish background, soon extensively red, often with slightly darker streaks"^, (Siegel), 4-12cm x 0.8-3cm, "equal or with enlarged base", "extensively red over a yellowish background, often with red punctations aggregated into blurry chevrons and streaks, rarely staining blue", "base often white", (Frank)
ODOR  indistinct^ (Siegel, Frank)
TASTE  mild or lemony^ (Siegel, Frank)
EDIBILITY  edible and good (Siegel)
HABITAT  single "or scattered in troops", "on well-decayed, moss-covered logs and stumps or duff", both with hardwoods and with conifers, in California mostly fruiting in fall and winter, with scattered spring fruitings^, (Siegel), single or scattered in small groups, sometimes cespitose, in mixed forests, typically with conifers, sometimes with oak and other hardwoods, "occasionally emerging from well-rotted wood", (Frank)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull olive brown (Siegel, Frank)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-15 x 4-5.5 um, elongate to elliptic, smooth^, (Siegel), spores (11)12.2-15.9(16.6) x (4.6)4.8-5.8(6.2) um, subfusoid to subcylindric, inequilateral, "smooth, inamyloid"; basidia 4-spored, 19.6-29.9 x 7.4-11.8(13) um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia rare, 40-60 x 8-12 um, ventricose, colorless; cap cuticle "a trichoderm with cylindrical to elongated cells with brown walls", "some terminal cells clavate, slightly wider than underlying cells, some narrow with dark incrustations", clamp connections absent, (Frank)
NAME ORIGIN  atro- (from ater, Latin for black or dark), -purpureus (from purpureus, Latin for purple), referring to the color of the cap, (Frank)
SIMILAR  Xerocomellus zelleri has these provisional differentiating morphological features: 1) X. atropurpureus "more often has a reddish purple to wine-purple cap (usually lacking a distinct pale margin)", whereas X. zelleri caps "tend to be darker" - "blackish purple to olivaceous black with a distinctly paler margin", 2) the young caps of X. zelleri "are often slightly velvety" (as opposed to glabrous on X. atropurpureus.), (Siegel(2)). X. zelleri 1) is smaller and more slender, 2) has a dark vinaceous black, dark olivaceous black or brownish black or olive brown to gray cap (as opposed to the more often reddish purple to wine purple cap of X. atropurpureus), 3) has a slightly velvety cap surface (rather than bald to finely pruinose), 4) almost always shows a narrow, pale band around the cap margin (more variable in X. atropurpureus), 5) is less likely to show blue staining (although X. atropurpureus is variable in its staining reactions), and 6) has a cap cuticle with a trichoderm "of subglobose to ellipsoid cells, with narrow awl-shaped terminal cells" (as opposed to a trichoderm of cylindric cells with the terminal cells of the same width or slightly wider than underlying cells), (Frank(9)). |Xerocomellus mendocinensis, when dark, has been mistaken for X. atropurpureus or X. zelleri, but it stains rapidly blue, shows more distinct punctuations on the stem, and is typically associated with hardwoods, (Frank(9)).
SOURCES  Siegel(2)*, Frank(9)*
91
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomellus diffractus  N. Siegel, C.F. Schwarz, & J.L. Frank  J.L. Frank, N. Siegel & C.F. Schwarz  Fungal Systematics and Evolution 6: 278. 2020^;  Boletus chrysenteron  (Bull.) Fr. (misapplied name);  Xerocomus chrysenteron  (Bull.) Quel.  (misapplied name);  Xerocomellus chrysenteron  (Bull.) Sutara  (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  red-cracked bolete, red-cracking bolete, cracked-cap bolete, yellow-fleshed Boletus
NOTES  Features include 1) a dark to light brown to olive or olive gray cap that is tomentose to velvety and when mature has whitish to pale yellow to reddish cracks, 2) whitish to yellow flesh that turns blue slowly to moderately or erratically, 3) yellow to greenish pores that become large and irregular and typically stain blue slowly to moderately where bruised, 4) a yellowish to golden stem streaked with red punctations especially on lower stem, 5) fruiting under both conifers and hardwoods, and 6) non-truncate spores.^ | Xerocomellus diffractus is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest. It has been identified in the past as Boletus chrysenteron which is a European species. A sister species to Xerocomellus diffractus is indicated by molecular data from a Xerocomellus chrysenteron-like taxon in eastern North America but is not yet named (Frank(9)). RANGE ^Distribution is from central CA through the Pacific Northwest into BC, east to the Rocky Mountains of WY, and south into AZ; collections were examined from WA, OR, AZ, CA, and WY (Frank(9)). A. Parker, pers. comm., identified what is likely to be this species from ID (under the misapplied name Boletus chrysenteron before Xerocomellus diffractus was published).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  3-10(14)cm across, "rounded, bun-shaped to broadly convex at first, becoming flat", occasionally slightly wavy when old; "olive, olive gray to leather brown or tan", becoming paler when old, "more rarely reddish to pinkish brown"; in cracks whitish to pale yellow, becoming pinkish when old; "dry, finely velvety, becoming cracked"^, (Frank), 6-8cm, convex to broadly convex to flat, margin downcurved; dark brown or dark gray, pallid in cracks but usually with reddish tints in cracks toward margin when older; dry, dull, velvety to tomentose, usually shallowly and conspicuously areolate [cracked like dried mud] when old, (Thiers), 3-11cm, dark olive-brown to dark grayish olive, grayish brown, or brown, often tan to olive buff when old, (Arora), grayish brown to blackish brown (Trudell)
FLESH  "firm when young, becoming soft"; "whitish to pale yellow in pileus, yellow in stipe, bluing slowly to moderately or erratically"^, (Frank), 1-1.5cm thick, yellow, unchanging or becoming blue in irregular areas when exposed; in stem pallid to yellowish at top, "typically changing to reddish toward base, unchanging where exposed", (Thiers)
PORES  1-3(4) per mm, "small and round at first, enlarging and becoming slightly angular", pale yellow to dingy greenish when old, "staining blue to bluish gray, slowly to moderately when bruised"; tube layer sunken around stem, 0.5-1.5cm long^, (Frank), 1-1.5 mm, typically irregular, yellow, typically turning blue where bruised; tubes arched decurrent to depressed, similar in color, (Thiers)
STEM  4-10cm x 0.8-2cm, "equal or with an enlarged base", "yellow to golden, streaked with fine red punctations with red pigment more concentrated toward base, often sparse or absent entirely towards apex", when old "becoming more red upward"^, (Frank), 7-10cm x 1-1.7cm, equal or narrowly slightly downward, solid; usually yellow at the top, becoming reddish toward base, "sometimes pallid toward base and reddish only in midportion, or entirely pallid with only the striations or ridges colored red"; dry, bald, often longitudinally ridged or striate, mycelium at base whitish to yellow, (Thiers), 4-13cm x 0.5-1.5cm, (Arora)
ODOR  indistinct^ (Frank)
TASTE  mild^ (Frank)
EDIBILITY  yes but not choice and bear in mind the risk of confusing with untested species, (Thiers)
HABITAT  single "or scattered in troops", "under both conifers and hardwoods", "fall and early winter, or occasionally in spring on the California and Oregon coast, and summer in the Southwest, and at higher elevations"^, (Frank), single to gregarious under hardwoods and conifers, (Thiers)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull olive brown^ (Frank), olive-brown (Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (12.5)12.9-16.2 x (4.7)5.1-6.2 um, subfusoid to subcylindric, inequilateral to cylindric in side view, inamyloid^; basidia 4-spored, 18.5-27.2 x 7.5-11.5 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia infrequent, 38.9-49.5 x 11.6-11.9 um, "ventricose to subclavate"; cap cuticle a trichoderm of cylindric to elongated cells, terminal cells 5-7 um wide, "often narrower than those lower down", "pigment brown, parietal and incrusting, but light to absent in many terminal cells"; clamp connections absent, (Frank), spores 12-13.5 x 5-6 um, elliptic to subventricose [wider in middle] to subcylindric [almost cylindric], smooth, not truncate, ochraceous in KOH and Melzer's; basidia 4-spored, 33-36 x 7-9 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia scattered to numerous, common only on pores, 56-75 x 10-13 um, fusoid to fusoid-ventricose, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle a trichodermium with slightly differentiated hyphal tips, hyphae +/- 10 um wide, often heavily and spirally incrusted; stem cuticle interwoven, incrusted; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  from diffringere in Latin, meaning "to break", "referring to the extensively cracking pileus surface"
SIMILAR  Xerocomellus amylosporus has a darker cap "with more scattered and irregular cracks", a stem that develops brownish tones, "pores that bruise darker (inky) blue, a spore deposit that is more reddish brown in color, and larger, distinctly truncate spores", (Frank). X. amylosporus stains blue more quickly than X. diffractus, (N. Siegel, pers. comm.) |Xerocomellus rainisiae can be distinguished by its thick velvety cap cuticle, "the deep greenish black to bluish black staining" on the lower stem, and "the lack of extensive red pigmentation or red punctations" on the stem, (Frank). |Xerocomellus salicicola has a light brown to reddish cap "developing extensive cracking", an obscurely reticulate stem that is extensively red or retains a red band near the top, and grows with willow and birch, (Frank). |Xerocomellus mendocinensis "has quickly blue-staining pores" and a coarsely punctate stem "that is often extensively red or with a distinct red belt near the apex, and smaller truncate spores", (Frank). |Xerocomellus dryophilus has a more rosy red to pinkish brown cap, "stains blue more quickly and deeply", and grows with Quercus, but in dry conditions, fruitbodies can be hard to distinguish from X. diffractus, (Frank). |Xerocomus subtomentosus group is usually more olive to olive-brown on cap with no red in cracks, (Thiers). |Boletus 'spadiceus' [here treated as a synonym of Boletus 'ferrugineus'] characteristically shows blue to blue-green discoloration when ammonium hydroxide is applied to the cap, (Thiers). |See also SIMILAR section of Hortiboletus rubellus.
SOURCES  Frank(9)*, Thiers(1) (as Boletus chrysenteron), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus chrysenteron), Smith(35) (as Boletus chrysenteron), Arora(1)* (as Boletus chrysenteron), Trudell(4)* (as Boletus chrysenteron), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus chrysenteron), Lincoff(2)* (as Boletus chrysenteron), Ammirati(1)* (as Boletus chrysenteron), Miller(14)* (as Boletus chrysenteron), Redhead(5) (as Boletus chrysenteron), Both(1) (as Boletus chrysenteron), Desjardin(6)* (as Xerocomellus chrysenteron), Siegel(2)*, Marrone(1)*, MacKinnon(1)*
92
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomellus dryophilus  (Thiers) N. Siegel, C.F. Schwarz & J.L. Frank^  Index Fungorum 179: 1. 2014;  Boletus dryophilus  Thiers  California Mushrooms (New York): 82. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  red cracked-cap bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a velvety cap that is ruby red, vinaceous red or brick red when fresh, becoming more pinkish brown, the cap surface usually becoming extensively cracked revealing whitish to pinkish flesh, 2) yellow flesh that becomes blue when cut, 3) moderately large, angular, yellow pores that readily bruise blue, 4) a club-shaped stem that is yellow at the top and red to wine red on its lower part, the red pigment sometimes appearing punctate, and 5) growth under live oak.^ RANGE ^Distribution includes CA (Siegel(2)) and it has been found in the Columbia River gorge area (N. Siegel, pers. comm.).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  3-11cm across, "rounded, bun shaped to broadly convex at first", to nearly flat when old; ruby red to vinaceous red or brick red when fresh, "becoming dull tan-brown with pinkish or reddish tinges in dry weather", forms can occur that are dark brown to olive-brown; "dry, velvety-tomentose, and usually extensively cracked into tomentose plaques or scales", flesh in cracks "pallid yellowish white at first, often becoming pinkish tinged"^, (Siegel), 3-8(11)cm across, "hemispheric or bun-shaped to broadly convex" and then flat when old; "rosy red to vinaceous red, rosy red or brick-red when fresh, becoming dull tan-brown with pinkish or reddish tones in dry weather, occasionally with olive tones to extensively olive", in cracks showing "pallid yellowish white, often with some pink tones"; "dry, velvety-floccose and usually extensively cracked into plaques or scales", (Frank), 4-10cm across, convex to cushion-shaped when young, unchanging or becoming broadly convex to flat "to highly irregular and undulating" when old, margin incurved becoming decurved [downcurved]; when young near reddish brown to red, sometimes overlain by an olive brown tomentum, with age, in some the red color darkens to near dark red, in others the red fades and the olive brown predominates, often the combination of a red background and pallid tomentum gives the cap a pinkish brown appearance; "dry to slightly moist, conspicuously tomentose when young, unchanging or appearing subglabrous with age, sometimes becoming rimose to split and often developing into large cracks or conspicuous fissures", margin entire becoming eroded, (Thiers)
FLESH  firm, fleshy; "yellow, bruising blue rather quickly when cut"^, (Siegel), "pale to bright yellow, bruising blue rapidly", (Frank), 1-2cm thick, yellow with a slightly reddening under the cap surface, "slowly and erratically becoming blue when exposed", in stem colored as the surface, "becoming blue when exposed except at the base", (Thiers)
PORES  moderately large, "angular or irregularly shaped"; "pale yellow to dingy yellow or lemon yellow, bruising blue readily"; tubes sunken around stem^, (Siegel), "large, slightly angular or irregularly shaped, pale yellow to dingy yellow or lemon-yellow, bruising blue quickly when damaged", (Frank), 0.5-1 mm broad, angular, uneven, near olive yellow, bluing when bruised; tubes up to 1cm long, "broadly and deeply to shallowly depressed, sometimes appearing decurrent when very old", near olive yellow, bluing when exposed, (Thiers) 
STEM  3-10cm x 1-2cm thick, cylindric-straight or slightly curved, "sometimes slightly sinuous", "enlarged or club shaped at base, often tapered and sometimes slightly rooting at extreme base"; lemon yellow or dull yellow, "downward becoming orange-red and then red to wine red near base", reddish pigment "sometimes appearing very finely punctate", "basal tomentum yellowish"^, (Siegel), 3-12cm x 1-4cm, cylindric, "straight or slightly curved (sometimes slightly sinuous), enlarged or clavate at base", often narrowing downward "and sometimes slightly rooting at extreme base"; "lemon yellow or dull yellow over upper half, red to wine red near base", "reddish pigment sometimes appearing finely punctate over surface", "basal tomentum yellowish", (Frank), 5-8cm x 1-2cm at top, solid, equal or enlarging slightly toward the top, "often pinched and narrowed at the base"; yellow at the top, changing toward the base to reddish, the red colors particularly evident when old, darkening when bruised; dry to moist, glabrous (bald), (Thiers)
ODOR  indistinct^ (Siegel, Frank), not distinctive (Thiers)
TASTE  mild^ (Siegel, Frank), slightly acid near the cap cuticle, otherwise mild, (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  edible, consumed where better boletes unavailable, but mature specimens soft, and even young ones commonly parasitized by Hypomyces, (Siegel)
HABITAT  single or scattered, "often in drier forests under live oak", late fall into spring^, (Siegel), single to gregarious "in humus in open oak woods", in California associated with coastal live oak, (Thiers)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull olive-brown^, (Siegel, Frank), brown (Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11.5-16 x 5-6.5 um, elongate to elliptic^, (Siegel), spores (11.1)12-15.7(16.1) x (5.3)5.8-6.9(7.9) um, subelliptic to subfusoid, "smooth, inamyloid"; hymenial cystidia of two types: a) 23-29.8 x 6.5-8.6 um, "scattered to abundant, often fasciculate, narrowly clavate", and b) 30.2-42.9 x 10.1-12.6 um, "scattered, clavate"; cap cuticle "a trichoderm made up of elongated cells" 8-10 um wide, "terminal cells not differentiated", "pigment brown, coarsely encrusting in lower elements, finely encrusting in terminal cells"; clamp connections absent, (Frank), spores 12-16.5 x 5.5-8 um, subelliptic to subfusoid, not truncate, smooth, moderately thick-walled, brown in KOH, dark cinnamon brown in Melzer's reagent; basidia 4-spored, 20-26 x 7-9 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia 25-40 x 7-12, "scattered, inconspicuous, and sometimes apparently absent", clavate, embedded in the hymenium, colorless; cap cuticle "differentiated as a tangled trichodermium of heavily incrusted hyphae that stain pale ochraceous in KOH, the incrustations frequently spirally arranged"; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'tree-loving' or 'oak-loving', in this case probably the latter
SIMILAR  Xerocomellus diffractus "has an olive-gray cap, and a slow bluing reaction on the pores", (Siegel(2)). "Xerocomellus" mendocinensis comb. prov. "has a much darker cap and a more evenly red stipe", (Siegel(2)). 
SOURCES  Siegel(2)*, Frank(9)*, Thiers(1)
93
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomellus mendocinensis  (Thiers) N. Siegel, C.F. Schwartz, & J.L. Frank^  Fungal Systematics and Evolution 6: 282. 2020;  Boletus truncatus  (Singer, Snell & E.A. Dick) Pouzar (misapplied name);  Xerocomus truncatus  Singer, Snell & E.A. Dick  (misapplied name);  Xerocomellus truncatus  (Singer, Snell & E.A. Dick) Klofac  (misapplied name);  Boletus mendocinensis Thiers, California Mushrooms (New York): 84. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry, finely velvety cap that is dark olive-brown when young lightening to olive-tan to medium brown, the cap surface cracking in its outer part to reveal flesh that is usually not pinkish, 2) yellowish flesh (reddish to tan near stem base), that bruises blue slowly to quickly, 3) a pore surface that is yellow (sometimes orange-red) when young, quickly bluing where bruised, the pores irregularly round to angular, 4) an equal stem that is yellow when young but soon covered with dense reddish dots and often washed red almost to the top, often with a contrasting red girdle just below the yellow at the top, 5) growth with conifers or hardwoods, and 6) elongate spores, many with a strongly truncate (squared-off) end.^ |'Xerocomellus' mendocinensis has been known by the misapplied name Boletus truncatus (an eastern North American species). It is almost the same as Xerocomellus chrysenteron but with truncate spores. The ITS DNA sequence of the type of Boletus mendocinensis Thiers "is identical to the bulk of western North American collections" labeled as 'truncatus', (Frank). Anomalously, the type description of Boletus mendocinensis describes long spores that are not truncate: "15-21(27) X 4-5(6) um, narrowly cylindric in face view, slightly inequilateral in profile, giant spores and pleomorphism rather common"..."The absence of any amyloid reaction or truncate apex in the spores readily distinguishes it from B. truncatus and related species" (Thiers(1) using a mu character rather than u in the unit of measurement). |Thiers(1) distinguishes Boletus truncatus (described separately from Boletus mendocinensis) from Boletus chrysenteron primarily on the character that at least a majority of the spores are truncate, but also says that Boletus truncatus does not usually show the characteristic red or reddish pigment in the cracks that Boletus chrysenteron shows, (Thiers(1)). |Siegel(2) say "Reliable identification of the cracked-cap boletes in our area [Redwood Coast of California] is difficult and is more reliably done after experience with all of the species involved and the range variation shown by each one. In comparison to the other Xerocomellus in our area, the relatively dark, moderately cracked cap, quick blue staining, and extensively red, punctate stipe are good clues." |The description is derived from Siegel(2) except where otherwise noted. RANGE ^Xerocomellus mendocinensis is known from CA, OR, and WA, "likely also occurring in northwestern Mexico, and expected into southern British Columbia". It is thought to be the correct name for what has been called Boletus truncatus on the west coast of North America. Boletus truncatus has also been reported in Idaho (Both), and occurs in eastern North America (Siegel).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^KOH blackish on cap, orange on flesh
CAP  3-10cm across, "domed or bun shaped when young, expanding to broadly convex, eventually nearly flat, occasionally wavy"; usually "dark olive-brown when young (to almost blackish in one uncommon variant), soon olive-tan to medium brown, sometimes lighter gray in age"; "dry, finely velvety, cracking near the margin, often only cracking on outer quarter of cap, but occasionally extensively cracked across entire cap", flesh in cracks "dull tan-brown or light olive to pallid creamy (rarely pinkish)"^, (Siegel), 3-10cm across, hemispheric to bun-shaped becoming broadly convex, nearly flat, "sometimes wavy"; "most often dark olive brown when young, sometimes cool gray or nearly blackish, soon olive tan or medium brown", sometimes medium gray when old, color in cracks "dull tan brown to strongly pinkish or dull red"; dry, "finely velvety", usually cracking over outer quarter of cap radius, "sometimes becoming extensively cracked over most of surface" (usually when old or in dry weather), "rarely not cracking at all", (Frank)
FLESH  yellow, "marbled with creamy white in some areas", reddish to tan near stem base, "slowly to quickly bruising blue" [the illustration in Siegel(2) shows the most intense blue staining in the bottom part of the stem flesh]^, (Siegel), in cap "pale whitish yellow, moderately to strongly bluing when exposed"; in stem "fibrous, pale whitish yellow, with darker yellow to red in base, staining blue when cut", (Frank)
PORES  small and irregularly round at first, "soon moderately large and distinctly angular"; bright yellow to dull yellow, "soon straw colored, often with ocher or reddish brown mouths in age, sometimes distinctly orange-red from start", quickly turning "dark teal to navy blue where bruised"^, (Siegel), "round and more densely packed when young", somewhat angular when old, "pallid yellow at first, soon bright yellow, then dull yellow with orange-brown tones, occasionally orange-red to red, quickly and intensely bruising strongly blue when damaged"; tube layer sunken around stem, (Frank)
STEM  4-10cm x 1-2.5cm, cylindric, "usually straight or slightly curved near base (sometimes squat and irregular)"; yellow when very young, "but soon extensively covered with a dense layer of reddish dots and often evenly washed red almost to top", often with a strong, contrasting band or girdle of red pigment "just below yellow area at extreme apex"^, (Siegel), 4-10cm x 1-2.5cm, cylindric, "equal to clavate"; "extensively red to rose red with red punctation over a yellow ground color", uppermost part of stem often with strongest red hues, "sometimes appearing as a red band near apex", "staining dark blue when handled", (Frank)
ODOR  indistinct^ (Siegel, Frank)
TASTE  mild^ (Siegel, Frank)
EDIBILITY  edible - texture is a bit soft, with an unremarkable flavor, (Siegel)
HABITAT  single, scattered in troops or in small clumps, "most common under live oak in the southern part of our range" [Redwood Coast of California], but found in mixed forest of Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and Notholithocarpus densiflorus (Tanoak) northward, fruiting in fall and early winter^, (Siegel), single, in small groups or scattered in troops, "typically not clustered", found "in a wide variety of forest types": in the Pacific Northwest with conifers, commonly in California under Quercus agrifolia (California Live Oak) and Notholithocarpus densiflorus, sometimes with Chrysolepis chrysophylla (Golden Chinquapin), (Frank)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown^ (Siegel, Frank)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-15 x 4.5-6 um, "elongate, smooth, many with a strongly truncate (squared-off) end"^, (Siegel(2)), spores (9.7)11.7-15.1(16.7) x 4.3-5.4(5.8) um, "subfusoid to subcylindrical, inequilateral", "smooth, inamyloid". "In the majority of collections examined, the spore apex shape varies from truncate to convex, with typically about half the spores truncate". Frank(9). Spores are longer in the holotype: 15-21(27) x 4-5(6) um as measured by Thiers (and Frank(9) confirmed that the holotype has anomalously large spores up to 27 um long and a convex, non-truncate apex). Hymenial cystidia infrequent, 31.6-54.1 x 9.9-13.6 um, cylindric or ventricose with elongated apex; cap cuticle "a trichoderm with elongated cells and erect irregular to clavate to conical or hardly differentiated terminal cells", "pigment brown, coarsely encrusting in lower elements, light brown and parietal in terminal cells"; clamp connections absent.(Frank(9)).
NAME ORIGIN  means 'from Mendocino'
SIMILAR  Other similar species do not have frequent truncate, inamyloid spores. Xerocomellus diffractus (previously known by the misapplied name Boletus chrysenteron) has a less extensively red stem, an often paler cap, and slower blue-staining, (Siegel(2)). Xerocomellus atropurpureus "can appear similar, but has a dark blackish purple to wine red, wrinkled to smooth cap that doesn't become cracked and pores that rarely stain blue", (Siegel). Xerocomellus rainisiae "has a thick velvety-tomentose cap skin that only cracks in age", has a golden yellow stem with a reddish blush at the base, "and stains intensely dark blue-green when handled" (especially on the stem), (Siegel(2)). Xerocomellus zelleri is somewhat similar but it is usually darker in color with a pale marginal band, and pores rarely stain blue. Xerocomellus amylosporus has spores with a truncate apex, but they are at least weakly amyloid (Frank), its stem often develops brown or dingy colors, and its blue-staining is not as fast or intense as in X. mendocinensis (N. Siegel, pers. comm.). See also SIMILAR section of Xerocomellus amylosporus and Hortiboletus rubellus.
SOURCES  Siegel(2)*, Frank(9)*, Smith(35) (as Boletus truncatus), Both(1) (as Boletus truncatus), Thiers(1) (as Boletus truncatus), Desjardin(6)*
94
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomellus rainisiae  (Bessette & O.K. Mill.) N. Siegel, C.F. Schwarz & J.L. Frank^ [as 'rainisii']  Index Fungorum 179: 1. 2014;  Boletus rainisiae  Bessette & O.K. Mill.  [as 'rainisii'], in Bessette, Roody & Bessette, North American Boletes, A Color Guide to the Fleshy Pored Mushrooms (Syracuse): 145. 2000;  Cyanoboletus rainisiae  (Bessette & O.K. Mill.) Gelardi, Vizzini & Simonini [as 'rainisii'], in Vizzini  Index Fungorum 176: 1. 2014 (proposed new name);  Boletus pulverulentus  Opat.  Wiegm. Arch. Nat. 2: 27. 1836 (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dark olive or olive-brown to blackish brown, velvety-tomentose cap that becomes paler olive-brown to yellowish brown at maturity and develops conspicuous cracks with yellow flesh showing, 2) yellow flesh, base flesh with dull red tints, 3) small, pale yellow to yellow-olive pores, often developing a reddish blush, 4) a stem that is club-shaped to equal, bald, smooth, and yellow, often with reddish longitudinal streaks or reddish blotches, 5) growth under conifers, 6) microscopic characters, and 7) green to blue staining reactions of all parts.^ | The staining reactions are described this way: for cap, instantly staining greenish black (or more blue) when handled or bruised; for flesh and tubes, instantly turning blue when exposed or cut; for pores, instantly staining dark green or dark blue-green when bruised, then slowly brownish; for stem, instantly staining dark green or dark blue-green to dark teal-blue, then greenish black when handled or bruised. The greenish tint described for the staining on cap and stem can in fact appear more blue - the exact color can be affected by moisture and age. Alan Bessette subsequently noted that the observations used for the descriptions were made on rather wet specimens (Alan Bessette, pers. comm.). RANGE ^Distribution is from Vancouver Island in BC south into OR; collections were examined from WA and OR, (Frank(9)). Boletus pulverulentus was reported from at least Oregon prior to the description of X. rainisiae but the reports may represent X. rainisiae.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  4-12cm across, "rounded to convex when young, becoming broadly convex" to nearly flat, "margin downturned, becoming even", occasionally uplifted when old; "dark olive, olive-brown to blackish brown when young, becoming paler olive-brown, olive gray to yellowish brown" with yellowish showing in cracks when old, "instantly staining greenish black when damaged"; "dry, velvety to velvety-tomentose when young, more appressed-tomentose and conspicuously areolate" when old^, (Frank), 4-11.5cm, convex to nearly flat, margin incurved at first, with narrow band of sterile tissue; "dark olive-brown to blackish brown when young, becoming paler olive-brown to yellowish brown at maturity, instantly staining greenish black when handled or bruised"; "dry, velvety-tomentose to appressed-tomentose", becoming conspicuously cracked, with yellow flesh showing between cracks when old, (Bessette(3))
FLESH  "in pileus moderately thick, firm, yellow with red in stipe base and around larva tunnels, staining blue when cut"^, (Frank), yellow, instantly turning blue when exposed, stem flesh yellow with dull red tints at base, also instantly turning blue when exposed, (Bessette(3))
PORES  2-3 per mm, "round to angular, yellow to golden yellow when young becoming dark golden yellow to yellow-olive, and often developing a reddish blush" when old, "quickly staining dark blue-green when bruised, then slowly brownish"; tube layer "broadly attached or with a narrow notch" at stem, 0.5-1.5cm long^, (Frank), 1-3 per mm, angular to irregular; "pale yellow, becoming darker dull golden yellow with brownish to reddish tints in age, instantly staining dark green, then slowly brownish when bruised"; tube layer 0.5-1.2cm thick, colored as pore surface, instantly turning blue when exposed, (Bessette(3))
STEM  3-9cm x 1-3.5cm, widened in lower part when young, becoming more equal when old, "with a pinched base"; "bright yellow to golden yellow", often tinged with reddish longitudinal streaks, "and red blotches near base", "staining dark blue-green to dark teal-blue to greenish black when handled", white mycelium at base; stem dry, smooth^, (Frank), 3-9cm x 1.5-3.5cm, club-shaped at first, widening downward or sometimes nearly equal when mature, with pinched base, solid; "bright yellow with rusty red tinges near the base, instantly staining dark green, then greenish black when handled or bruised"; dry, bald without reticulum or longitudinal ridges; partial veil and ring absent; basal mycelium white, (Bessette(3))
ODOR  indistinct^, (Frank), not distinctive (Bessette(3))
TASTE  indistinct^, (Frank), not distinctive (Bessette(3))
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette(3))
HABITAT  single, "scattered in troops or small clusters, in conifer forests, both along the coast and in the foothills and drier eastern slopes of the Cascade Range"; typical sites forested with mixed conifers including Picea sitchensis (Sitka spruce), Abies grandis (Grand Fir), Abies concolor (White Fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), "along coast from mid to late fall into winter, typically later than other Xerocomellus, and at higher elevations in summer and fall"^, (Frank with Latin names italicized), scattered or in groups under mixed conifers, including Douglas-fir and Western Hemlock, October to December, (Bessette(3))
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown (Frank, Bessette(3))
MICROSCOPIC  spores (11.4)13.3-16.4(18.5) x 5-6.5(7.1) um, subelliptic to subcylindric, "inequilateral in side view, smooth, inamyloid"^, basidia 4-spored, 24.6-38.3 x 9.5-13.6 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia scattered, 39.9-68.1 x 9-11.1 um, with 2.8-4.7 um wide necks, "ventricose rostrate to fusoid ventricose"; cap cuticle "a trichoderm with narrowly clavate to fusiform terminal cells, wider than underlying cells", "pigment brown, coarsely encrusting in lower elements, hardly present in terminal cells"; clamp connections absent, (Frank), spores 10-17 x 4.2-7 um, ventricose to elliptic in face view, inequilateral and narrowly elliptic in side view, smooth, ochraceous in KOH or Melzer's; basidia 4-spored, 37-55 x 9-14 um, narrowly clavate, thin-walled, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia scattered, 35-58 x 8-12 um, ventricose-rostrate to fusoid-ventricose, smooth, thin-walled, colorless with ochraceous content in KOH; cap cuticle a trichodermium with narrowly clavate to fusiform end cells; clamp connections absent, (Bessette(3))
NAME ORIGIN  in honor of Arleen Rainis Bessette who first collected it
SIMILAR  X. rainisiae can be distinguished from Xerocomellus diffractus and Xerocomellus mendocinensis by its thick velvety cap cuticle, "the deep greenish black to bluish black staining" on the lower stem, and "the lack of extensive red pigmentation or red punctations" on the stem, (Frank(9)).
SOURCES  Bessette(3)* (as Boletus rainisii), Frank(9)*, Bessette(1)* (photograph as Boletus pulverulentus)
95
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomellus salicicola  C.F. Schwarz, N. Siegel & J.L. Frank^  in J.L. Frank, N. Siegel, C.F. Schwarz, B. Araki, E.C. Vellinga, Fungal Systematics and Evolution 6: 283. 2020
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dull red, tan to brown cap that becomes extensively cracked-areolate, with pinkish yellow tones beneath, 2) light yellow flesh that bruises blue, 3) relatively large yellow pores that bruise dark blue fairly quickly, 4) a stem that is reddish overall, or yellowish with red streaks and a reddish band near the top, the upper part reticulate, 5) growth usually under willow, but also cottonwood and birch, and 6) microscopic characters including relatively small spores and clavate to ventricose hymenial cystidia.^ | The description is derived from Frank(9). RANGE ^Xerocomellus salicola is known to occur from San Diego County, CA north into OR; collections were examined from CA including the holotype, (Frank(9)). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^"KOH turning the tissues yellow"
CAP  3-10cm across, bun-shaped, becoming convex to flat; "dull red, tan to brown"; "dry, slightly tomentose or suede-like when young", "surface soon extensively cracked, in age this areolate pattern extending over entire surface with many brown plaques revealing pinkish yellow tones between"
FLESH  in cap "fleshy, light yellow"; in stem fibrous, "light creamy yellow, bruising blue throughout"
PORES  "pores relatively large at maturity, slightly angular or irregular", "pale yellow to dingy yellow or lemon yellow, bruising dark dingy blue fairly quickly and strongly"; tube layer slightly sunken around stem
STEM  3-5cm x 1-4cm, solid, cylindric, "or with a pinched and tapered base"; "reddish overall or yellowish with red streaks and a reddish band near the apex"; upper part "coarsely reticulate, sometimes becoming diffuse and obscure"
ODOR  not distinctive
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  in small groups of 1-4 fruitbodies, "sometimes clustered, often from wet, muddy or hard-packed soil in riparian areas", typically associated with willow species, and in one case with Populus trichocarpa (Black Cottonwood), occasionally in landscaped areas under Betula pendula (Silver Birch); "in spring, summer, and fall"
SPORE DEPOSIT  "dull olive brown"
MICROSCOPIC  spores (10.5)12-14.2(14.5) x 4.6-6 um, "subellipsoid to subfusoid"^; basidia 4-spored, 27.3-37.1 x 10.2-12.3 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia scattered, 32.8-46.1 x 11.8-14.5 um, "clavate or ventricose with acute to obtuse apex"; cap cuticle a trichoderm made up of cylindric to ellipsoid cells up to 15 um wide, with conic or cylindric terminal cells, "pigment brown, incrusting, but terminal cell walls often colorless"
NAME ORIGIN  from genus Salix (willow) and -cola, Latin for "inhabitant of", "referring to the dominant tree in the habitat where it is most commonly encountered"
SIMILAR  Xerocomellus diffractus has slightly larger spores, and a different habitat preference (conifers and hardwoods), (Frank(9)). Xerocomellus dryophilus could be confused if faded, but usually has a more evenly pinkish red cap, a two-toned stem, with a yellow upper half and red base, and slightly larger spores, (Frank(9)). Additionally, the occasionally coarsely reticulate, and reddish upper stipe of X. salicicola helps to distinguish it from X. dryophilus and X. diffractus, (Frank(9) with Latin names italicized).
SOURCES  Frank(9)*
96
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomellus zelleri  (Murrill) Klofac^  Ost. Z. Pilzk. 20: 39. 2011;  Boletus zelleri  (Murrill) Murrill  Mycologia 4: 217. 1912;  Xerocomus zelleri  (Murrill) Snell
ENGLISH NAME(S)  Zeller's bolete
NOTES  Features of Xerocomellus zelleri include 1) a dark vinaceous black, occasionally dark olivaceous black or dark brownish black cap with a paler band around the extreme margin, the surface finely velvety when young, 2) light creamy yellow flesh that sometimes turns slightly blue, 3) moderately sized, round to irregular yellowish pores that occasionally turn blue, 4) a stem with a yellow background that has red punctations at first and becomes more evenly red in its upper part or throughout, 5) growth on or around moss-covered logs in conifer forest, and 6) microscopic characters.^ | Xerocomellus atropurpureus was been included with the species concept of X. zelleri before the description of X. atropurpureus in 2020. The included images specifically represent Xerocomellus zelleri as opposed to X. atropurpureus. Differentiating features between the two are given in the SIMILAR section of Xerocomellus atropurpureus. X. atropurpureus is more common than X. zelleri. Frank(9) say (with Latin names italicized), "Locally common in mature forests on the Olympic Peninsula in Washington, rare across the rest of its range. Despite extensive collecting over a six-year period in [sic], we encountered this species only five times. We studied all observations of X. zelleri on Mushroom Observer (mushroomobserver.org) and concluded that all but one observation from California represent X. atropurpureus." RANGE ^Xerocomellus zelleri ranges from southern BC to the northern California coast (Frank). Collections were examined from WA, OR, and CA, with additional GenBank data from BC, (Frank).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  2-6(9)cm across, convex to flat, occasionally uplifted and wavy when old; dark vinaceous black, "occasionally dark olivaceous black to brownish black, rarely deep reddish black", "at all times with a paler, whitish beige to yellowish tan band around the margin", "smooth or finely roughened, wrinkled or pitted, finely, densely velvety when young, becoming more matted in age"^, (Siegel), 2-6(9)cm across, convex to flat, occasionally uplifted and wavy when old; "dark vinaceous black, occasionally dark olivaceous black to brownish black or olive brown to gray, rarely deep reddish black, at all times with a paler, whitish beige to yellowish tan band around the extreme margin"; "smooth or finely roughened, wrinkled or pitted, finely, densely velvety when young", becoming matted to bald when old, (Frank)
FLESH  thin, firm; "light creamy yellow, not bruising blue", or slightly so in older specimens^, (Siegel), in cap "thin, firm, light creamy yellow, not bruising blue, or slightly so in older or waterlogged specimens"; in stem, fibrous, light dingy yellow, reddish at base when old, (Frank)
PORES  small, "round to slightly angular or irregular"; pale creamy yellow to dingy yellow "or pale yellowish olive when young, becoming dingy yellow to dingy yellow olive, occasionally developing reddish blushes in age", not bruising blue, or occasionally doing so in older, waterlogged specimens; tubes "short to moderately long", sunken around stem to slightly decurrent^, (Siegel), 2-4 per mm, "round to slightly angular or irregular", "pale creamy yellow to dingy yellow, or pale yellowish olive when young, becoming dingy yellow to dingy yellow olive, occasionally developing reddish blushes" when old, "not bruising blue, or occasionally erratically so in older, waterlogged specimens"; tube layer sunken around stem to slightly decurrent, (Frank)
STEM  2-7cm x 0.5-2cm, cylindric or narrowing at the base; yellowish background color, covered extensively with fine rosy red punctations when young, becoming evenly rosy red to dark red when old^, (Siegel), 2-7 x 0.5-2cm, cylindric, "or with a tapered base"; yellow background color, covered extensively with fine rosy red punctations when young, becoming evenly rosy red to dark red when old, (Frank)
ODOR  indistinct^ (Siegel, Frank)
TASTE  mild to lemony^ (Siegel, Frank)
EDIBILITY  edible and good, with a pleasant lemony taste (Siegel)
HABITAT  single or scattered in moss, "or on or around moss covered stumps and logs"; found extensively in mature and old growth coniferous forest^, (Siegel), single or scattered in moss or on and around moss-covered stumps and logs, "in mature and old growth conifer forest", (Frank)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull olive-brown^ (Siegel)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-15 x 4-5.5 um, elongate to elliptic, smooth^, (Siegel), spores (11.4)12.2-16.7(18.4) x 4.6-6.2(7.2) um, subfusoid to subcylindric, inequilateral, smooth, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 35.3-47.9 x 9.3-12.8 um, narrowly clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia rare, 25-50 x 6-11 um, ventricose to subcylindric, colorless; cap cuticle "a trichoderm with subglobose to ellipsoid underlying cells and clavate to cylindrical awl-shaped terminal cells, often narrower than lower cells", "pigment brown, heavily encrusting in lower cells, parietal in terminal cells"; clamp connections absent, (Frank)
NAME ORIGIN  after American mycologist Sanford Myron Zeller (19 October 1885 - 4 November 1948)
SIMILAR  See Xerocomellus atropurpureus and Xerocomellus mendocinensis for differentiating characters.
SOURCES  Frank(9)*, Siegel(2)*
97
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomus ferrugineus  (Schaeff.) Alessio^  Boletus Dill. ex L. (Saronno): 282. 1985;  Boletus ferrugineus  Schaeff.  Fung. bavar. palat. nasc. (Ratisbonae) 1: 85, tab. 4. 1762;  Boletus spadiceus  Fr.;  Boletus oregonensis  (Murrill) Murrill  (possible correct name for local species);  Xerocomus oregonensis  (possible proposed combination for local species)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry, velvety brown to reddish brown cap, 2) white flesh that is unchanging or turning slowly blue near the tubes or in the stem, 3) angular yellow pores that turn blue, 4) a pale yellow to whitish stem that is often reticulate, and 5) a cap surface that discolors blue to blue-green when ammonium hydroxide is applied.^ |The description here is for the type variety of Boletus spadiceus which is considered to be a synonym of Xerocomus ferrugineus. |According to D. Miller, pers. comm., "A dozen Pacific Northwest sequences of Xerocomus showed the same genetic species of Xerocomus, usually within one bp. It does not match reliable sequences of Xerocomus subtomentosus or Xerocomus ferrugineus (which has been found in Alaska), so it is likely that 'Xerocomus' oregonensis is our most common species. Reports of Xerocomus subtomentosus and Xerocomus ferrugineus in the Pacific Northwest need verification." RANGE ^Boletus ferrugineus has been reported as Boletus spadiceus from WA, OR, ID (Thiers 1986 pers. comm. to Lorelei Norvell), and has appeared on foray lists from WA and ID. There is a collection from BC by O. Ceska at the University of British Columbia as Boletus spadiceus.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle blue then fuscous with NH4OH, cap cuticle dark brown with KOH, flesh orange-yellow with KOH, (Thiers), cap cuticle green to bluish green then fuscous then reddish brown with NH4OH, no reaction on cap, flesh or stem with FeSO4, (Smith)
CAP  4-10cm, convex to flat-convex; brown to reddish brown, when old usually becoming dark brown or fading to pale yellow brown, often retaining a reddish tint and appearing dark reddish brown when wet; dry, dull, velvety to subtomentose [somewhat tomentose] to tomentose^, (Thiers), 5-11cm wide, convex becoming broadly convex or nearly flat; "dark olive to olive-yellow with reddish tints, yellow-brown, reddish brown, or date-brown"; dry, velvety-tomentose, sometimes cracked when old, (Bessette)
FLESH  1-1.5cm thick, pale vinaceous near cap surface and yellow above tubes, otherwise white, unchanged when exposed or slowly blue near tubes; in stem "white to pale yellow, unchanging or slowly changing to blue when exposed"^, (Thiers), pale yellow, unchanging or turning blue slightly when bruised, turning bright yellow then pinkish around larval tunnels, (Bessette)
PORES  1-2mm, often compound, angular; yellow, changing to blue when bruised or exposed; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, depressed to subdecurrent, colored and changing as pores^, (Thiers), 1-2mm, angular; yellow to olive-yellow, often but not always staining blue or blue-green when bruised; tube layer 0.8-1cm thick, (Bessette)
STEM  5-15cm x 1-2cm at top, equal or narrowing toward base, solid; pale yellow to buff to occasionally almost white, sometimes with brownish stains; dry, often coarsely reticulate in top part, smooth to longitudinally ridged toward base^, (Thiers), 4-10cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal but often narrowing downward, solid; "mostly yellow or paler, sometimes with brownish stains but never red", typically whitish at base; sometimes with raised longitudinal lines forming a partial reticulum at the top or nearly overall; often with yellow basal mycelium; partial veil and annulus absent, (Bessette), "pallid over apical part at first, pruinose with brownish to reddish pruina, sometimes with coarse longitudinal ridges or obscurely widely reticulated", (Smith)
ODOR  mild^ (Thiers), mild to slightly pungent (Bessette)
TASTE  mild^ (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  "in groups on the ground in mixed woods and under conifers, along road banks and trails"^, (Bessette)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark olive brown^ (Thiers), olive to pale olive brown (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-11 x 4-5.5 um, subfusoid to subelliptic [somewhat spindle-shaped to somewhat elliptic], smooth, pale ochraceous in KOH and Melzer's, thin-walled^; basidia 4-spored, 20-30 x 4-6 um, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia numerous, conspicuous, projecting, 40-55 x 4-7 um, clavate to fusoid to fusoid-ventricose, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle "differentiated as a trichodermium of suberect to tangled to repent hyphal tips, irregularly incrusted, ochraceous in KOH, rust red in Melzer's"; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores 10-14 x 4.5-5 um, oblong to ventricose [wider in middle], smooth, pale brown; "hymenial cystidia not furcate; hymenophoral trama lacking a strong, fleeting amyloid reaction", (Bessette), spores (9)11-14 x 4.5-5 um, oblong to ventricose, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'date-colored'
SIMILAR  Xerocomus subtomentosus group's other members are similar but the caps do not discolor blue to blue-green when ammonium hydroxide is applied: B. 'spadiceus' [treated here as a synonym of Boletus 'ferrugineus'] often has more reddish pigment in the cap and typically appears reddish brown when wet, (Thiers). See also SIMILAR section of Xerocomellus diffractus.
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus spadiceus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus spadiceus), Arora(1) (as Boletus spadiceus), Smith(35) (as Boletus spadiceus)
98
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  'Xerocomus' oregonensis^  comb. prov.;  Boletus oregonensis  (Murrill) Murrill  Mycologia 4 (4): 217. 1912;  Ceriomyces oregonensis  Murrill  Mycologia 4(2): 99. 1912
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a medium sized, bay-colored cap that is dry and short-tomentose to nearly bald, 2) white, unchanging flesh, 3) a yellow to greenish yellow pore surface that is decurrent, the pores large and radially elongate near the stem, and 4) a bald, non-reticulate, pale bay, solid stem that is wider in its lower part.^ |This taxon is a member of the Xerocomus subtomentosus group. |The description is derived from Murrill(10). |According to D. Miller, pers. comm., "A dozen Pacific Northwest sequences of Xerocomus showed the same genetic species of Xerocomus, usually within one bp. It does not match reliable sequences of Xerocomus subtomentosus or Xerocomus ferrugineus (which has been found in Alaska), so it is likely that 'Xerocomus' oregonensis is our most common species. Reports of Xerocomus subtomentosus and Xerocomus ferrugineus in the Pacific Northwest need verification." RANGE ^The holotype is from OR.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^
CAP  12cm across, convex, firm, margin "entire or slightly lobed, scarcely projecting"; cap color bay; surface "even, not viscid, short-tomentose to subglabrous"
FLESH  in cap firm, white, unchanging, in stem white
PORES  tubes very large, 0.2-0.3cm in diameter, "depressed and radially elongate about the stem, ventricose"; "flavous to dull greenish-yellow, melleous within, not changing when bruised"
STEM  6.5cm x 2cm at center, wider in lower part, solid; very pale bay; bald, not reticulate
ODOR  "mild, odor not characteristic"
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  holotype is a single specimen "on the ground in sandy pine barrens on the immediate coast at Newport, Oregon"; "Although growing in sand, the weather conditions were very humid"
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-12 x 4 um, oblong-elliptic, smooth, melleous^
NAME ORIGIN  means 'from Oregon'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Murrill(10) (as Ceriomyces oregonensis)
99
FAMILY  Boletaceae, Order Boletales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAME(S)  Xerocomus subtomentosus  (L.) Quel.  group^  Fl. mycol. France (Paris): 418.1888;  Boletus subtomentosus  Linne  Syst. Mycol. p. 389. 1821  group;  Ceriomyces oregonensis  Murrill
ENGLISH NAME(S)  yellow-cracked bolete, boring brown bolete, suede bolete
NOTES  Features include 1) a dull olive to yellowish brown cap that is velvety to somewhat tomentose, with yellowish cracks when old, 2) whitish flesh that may turn blue with exposure, 3) large and often compound angular yellow pores that may turn blue when bruised, and 4) a yellow stem with reddish brown marks and stains and sometimes a partial reticulum.^ |This group includes 'Xerocomus' oregonensis and other Xerocomus species. According to D. Miller, pers. comm., "A dozen Pacific Northwest sequences of Xerocomus showed the same genetic species of Xerocomus, usually within one bp. It does not match reliable sequences of Xerocomus subtomentosus or Xerocomus ferrugineus (which has been found in Alaska), so it is likely that Xerocomus oregonensis is our most common species. Reports of Xerocomus subtomentosus and Xerocomus ferrugineus in the Pacific Northwest need verification." |Wu, G.(1) is a molecular study indicating that Xerocomus tomentosus and a few other species constitute a clade closely related to Phylloporus. RANGE ^Xerocomus subtomentosus group is found from eastern Canada south to NC, west to CA, north to AK, (Bessette). There are collections from OR and ID at the University of Washington. It occurs in WA (Michelle Seidl, pers. comm.), and is reported from BC (in Redhead), and NS (Grund). This species is said to occur in Europe, Asia, N. Africa, and N. America, (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^cap cuticle darkening slightly with KOH, negative to darkening slightly with NH4OH, flesh negative to pale yellow with KOH, flesh negative or pale gray with FeSO4, (Thiers), cap cuticle instantly reddish brown in NH4OH, (Bessette)
CAP  6-15cm, convex expanding, sometimes shallowly depressed when mature; when young yellow brown to olive brown to occasionally yellow, usually becoming darker brown when old, no reddish pigmentation on margin or in cracks, margin sometimes staining dark brown when handled; dry, dull, velvety to subtomentose [somewhat tomentose] to matted tomentose, usually not conspicuously areolate [cracked like dried mud] but sometimes cracked at least on margin^, (Thiers), cap 5-18cm, often distinctly areolate [cracked like dried mud] when old; margin with a narrow band of sterile tissue at least when young, (Bessette), 5-15(20)cm, "yellow brown to drab olive-brown to dull brown, or occasionally yellowish, but in age or especially in wet weather often redder (cinnamon-brown); sometimes with pallid, yellow or reddish-tinged cracks, especially near margin", minutely velvety but may appear smooth when old, (Arora), dull olivaceous to yellowish-olive or yellow-brown, (Both)
FLESH  1-2.5cm thick, firm; whitish to pale yellow, often colored like cap near cap surface, typically turning blue when exposed^, (Thiers), whitish, unchanging or turning slightly blue when cut, (Bessette), pallid to pale yellow, sometimes turning blue slightly when exposed, (Arora), pallid, white-yellowish, unchanging when cut, (Both)
PORES  1-2mm, angular to irregular, often compound; changing to blue when bruised, bright yellow to buff, changing to deeper yellow when old, rarely reddish; tube layer 1-2cm thick, becoming shallowly to deeply depressed when old, bright yellow to buff, changing to deeper yellow when old, turning blue when bruised^, (Thiers), 1-2 per mm, angular, gill-like near stem; yellow, becoming dull yellow when old, staining slightly and slowly greenish, then brownish when bruised; tube layer 1-2.5cm thick, (Bessette), 1-3mm, dull yellow to bright yellow, turning blue weakly or not at all when bruised, (Arora), yellow, bruising slightly greenish then brownish, (Both)
STEM  5-11cm x 1-2.5cm at top, equal or narrowing at base; yellow at the top, becoming rust colored in the midportion and pallid at base, occasionally with a yellow background color, but heavily overlain with darker granulations; dry, bald to granulose to appressed fibrillose or longitudinally ridged, sometimes obscurely reticulate at top; "often with whitish to yellow mycelium and yellow rhizoids arising from the base"^, (Thiers), 4-10 x 1-3cm, nearly equal or narrowing slightly downward, solid; yellow with reddish brown streaks and stains, staining brownish to reddish brown when handled or when old; dry, scurfy, "sometimes with raised, rib-like, longitudinal lines" that may form a partial reticulum at the top; partial veil and annulus absent, (Bessette), 4-14cm x 1-2(3)cm, equal or narrowing either way, firm; yellow to buff, or often stained brown to dull cinnamon especially in lower part, but never red; smooth or scurfy, the top "often coarsely reticulate from downward-extending tube walls", (Arora), yellow; pruinose, ribbed near top, (Both), "may sometimes appear reticulate. (One should not expect to always see reticulations and when you do they will usually not be the same as with Boletus edulis.)", (R. Bishop, pers. comm.)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Thiers)
TASTE  mild to slightly acid^ (Thiers), not distinctive (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  single or scattered on ground or among mosses under hardwoods or conifers^, (Bessette), early summer to late fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown^ (Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11.5-16 x 3.5-5 um, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped] to subcylindric [somewhat cylindric], smooth^, pale yellow ochraceous in KOH, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 27-32 x 7-9 um, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia scattered to numerous, 40-66 x 8-12 um, fusoid to fusoid-ventricose, often with elongated tapering apices, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle a more or less tangled trichodermium with numerous free septate hyphal tips, usually strongly incrusted, hyphae 5-7 um wide; stem cuticle differentiated as layer of free to loosely interwoven hyphal tips with occasional tufts or clusters of caulocystidia 24-40 x 6-9 um, fusoid to clavate, colorless, thin-walled; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores 10-15 x 3-5 um, subfusoid to oblong, smooth, yellow, (Bessette), spores 10-16 x 3.5-5 um (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "slightly hairy"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Boletus 'spadiceus' [here treated as a synonym of Boletus 'ferrugineus'] has a cap that may be more reddish brown, and pores may turn blue more readily, but it is reliably separated by a drop of ammonium hydroxide on cap which gives a fleeting blue-green to blue-black reaction in B. 'spadiceus', (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Xerocomellus diffractus, Hortiboletus rubellus, and Phylloporus arenicola.
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus), Arora(1)* (as Boletus), Both(1) (as Boletus), Phillips(1)* (as Boletus), Lincoff(2)* (as Boletus), Miller(14)* (as Boletus), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Boletus), Courtecuisse(1)*, Redhead(5) (as Boletus), Breitenbach(3)* (as Boletus), Grund(11) (as Boletus), Buczacki(1)*, Wu, G.(1), Marrone(1)* (as Boletus subtomentosus)
